Wherever possible, information contained within our Guide is available from us free of charge where it can be downloaded from our website or where it can be sent to you electronically by email.

We reserve the right to impose charges for providing information in paper copy or computer disc. Charges reflect the actual costs of reproduction and postage to Edinburgh Napier University, as set out below.

Fees for information not available under this Scheme can be found here.

Reproduction costs
Where charges are applicable, photocopied or scanned images will be charged at:
10p per A4 side of paper/A4 scanned image for a black and white copy
30p per A4 side of paper/A4 scanned image for a colour copy
Where more than 50 x A4 copies (or equivalent) are requested the University will provide a price on application.

Computer disks will be charged at the rate of £1.00 per CD.
Postage costs
We will pass on postage charges to the requester at the cost to Edinburgh Napier University of sending the information by first class post.
In the event that a charge is to be levied, you will be advised of the charge and how it has been calculated. Information will not be provided to you until payment has been received. Further information on charging can also be found on the Information we may withhold page.


If the information you are seeking is not available under this publication scheme, then you may wish to request it from us.
 
The Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 (FOISA) provides you with a right of access to the information we hold, subject to certain exemptions. The Environmental Information (Scotland) Regulations 2004 (EI(S)Rs) separately provide a right of access to the environmental information we hold, while the Data Protection Act 1998 (DPA) provides a right of access to any personal information about you that we hold. Again, these rights are subject to certain exceptions or exemptions. We will provide a response to any valid requests for information made under FOISA within 20 working days. Further information about requesting your personal data can be found on our Data Protection Code of Practice pages.

Email foi@napier.ac.uk to request a copy of any information we may hold that is not available under this scheme.

Charges for information not available under the scheme
Charges for information available under this scheme are set out under Fees. Charges for information covered by both Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 (FOISA) and the Environmental Information (Scotland) Regulations 2004 (EI(S)Rs) which is not available under the scheme is subject to charges based on the following calculations:

Charges for general information and environmental information
Processing cost 	% payable by customer	Waiver
 Up to £100	0%	Free of charge
£100 - £600	10%	First £100
Over £600	100% (environmental information only)	No waiver
For example, if you requested information that cost us £600 to provide, you would be asked to pay £50, calculated on the basis of a waiver for the first £100 and 10% of the remaining £500.

Please note:

for general information we are not obliged to respond to requests which will cost us over £600 to process
charges are calculated on the basis of the actual cost to Edinburgh Napier University of providing the information
we do not charge for the time to determine whether we hold the information requested nor for the time it takes to decide whether the information can be released
charges may be made for locating, retrieving and providing information to you
Current costs
Photocopying is charged at 10p per A4 sheet for black and white copying
30p per A4 sheet for colour copying
Postage is charged at actual rate for first class mail
Staff time is calculated at actual staff cost per staff member hourly salary rate to a maximum of £15 per person per hour (FOISA only).
Staff time will be charged at full cost for Environmental Information.
For chargeable information, we will issue you with a notification of the charge (a fees notice) including how it has been calculated. You will have three months from the date of issue of the fees notice in which to decide whether to pay the charge. The information will be provided on payment of the charge. There will be no charge to you if you decide not to proceed with the request
EIRS: Where charges may be applied
The Scottish Information Commissioner has provided the following guidance:

Regulation 8(3) of the EIRs allows authorities to charge a “reasonable amount” for making environmental information available. Any fee charged must not exceed the costs to the authority of producing the information requested, which means that indirect costs (such as the original cost of amassing data and creating a report) must not be passed on to the requester and that fees must not create a profit or surplus for the authority.
Producing” is not defined in the EIRs. However, the Commissioner takes the view that, as with FOISA, public authorities are entitled to charge for the staff time taken in the location and/or retrieval of that information (this will include staff time redacting information so that it can be provided in response to a request, but will not include time spent determining whether information is actually held or is subject to one or more of the exceptions), as well as the actual costs of supplying the information such as the cost of photocopying the documents and postage.


Website
This site and its contents are protected by copyright. The webpages may be viewed, printed or downloaded for personal, non-commercial use only. No part of this website may be modified, reproduced, transmitted, published or otherwise made available in whole or in part without the prior written consent of an authorised representative of the University. These terms and conditions are governed by and construed in accordance with Scots Law. To contact us with regard to the website or to use any of its content please email internet@napier.ac.uk.

FOI publication scheme
Unless otherwise stated, Edinburgh Napier University reserves copyright in all information available under this publication, regardless of format or media. The right to information under the publication scheme does not include permission to reproduce that information and consent of the copyright holder should always be sought.

Legal disclaimer
You use this website at your own risk. Whilst every attempt is made to ensure that information is accurate and up to date, Edinburgh Napier University is not responsible or liable for any damage or loss whatsoever arising from viewing, downloading, using or relying on information from the website. The University reserves the right to alter or amend the website without prior notice.

For information and convenience only this website contains links to sites operated by third parties, over which Edinburgh Napier University has no control and in respect of which the University accepts no liability.

For links to and an overview of the information covered by each category see the sections below.

8.1 General information
Name and address 
Principal Officers 
Contact information 
Location  
Opening hours  
Academic year dates 
Holidays 
Complaints 
Document serving (ie contact details for serving legal documents) 
8.2 Access to information
How to make a request for information and freedom of information enquiries contact 
Information legislation policies 
Records Management and archiving policy 
8.3 Governance
Legal Framework 
Governance Structure 
Governance precepts (ie compliance with good rules of conduct) 
Conflict of interest policy  
Register of interests 
Institutional structure 
Major committees 
Relationship with the General Council (Edinburgh Napier University does not have a General Council) 
General Council 
Subsidiary companies 
Honorary degrees
8.4 Financial resources
Financial statements 
Budgetary processes 
Budget overview 
Financial regulations 
Insurance 
Senior staff remuneration 
Investments 
8.5 Corporate planning
Edinburgh Napier University's Mission Statement 
Corporate Plan 
Strategies 
Performance indicators 
Planning procedures 
8.6 Procurement
Procurement policies 
Procurement procedures 
Procurement contracts 
Tender documentation 
Supplier contracts 
8.7 Management of research and development
Research funding 
Research quality 
Research strategies 
Research management structures 
Research support arrangements 
Research ethics   
Research students policies and procedures
8.8 Commercialisation and knowledge transfer
Support arrangements 
Contract information 
Commercialisation funding 
Commercialisation resources 
Commercialisation outcomes 
Consultancy services
8.9 Human resources
Staff profile 
Recruitment policies 
Employment terms 
Performance management 
Promotion 
Pensions 
Discipline 
Grievance 
Employee relations 
Public interest disclosure 
Staff development 
Staff records 
Staff facilities
8.10 Physical resources
Description of estate 
Estate development plans 
Buildings under construction 
Maintenance 
Estates indicators 
Environmental policies 
8.11 Health and safety
Policies 
Annual Reports and statistics  
8.12 Equality and diversity
Equal opportunities policies and guidance 
Equal opportunities consultation 
Equality management infrastructure
8.13 Support for disabled people
Disability policies 
Support structures 
Accessibility of buildings and services  
Contacts 
Strategies 
Statistics
8.14 Student administration and support
Course information 
Recruitment and admissions 
Fees and charges 
Scholarships and bursaries 
Registration 
Induction 
Examinations 
Progression 
Learning support provision 
Student liaison 
Student records 
Student discipline 
Student accommodation 
Graduation arrangements 
Student complaints 
Student facilities 
Relationship with Students Union / Association 
Students Union / Association
8.15 Teaching quality
Programme approval 
Assessment 
Student satisfaction 
Institutional internal reviews 
Professional accreditation of courses by external bodies 
Validation 
Assessments of Edinburgh Napier University's provision by the Quality Assurance Agency
8.16 Information services
Library facilities 
Computing facilities 
Other information facilities 
Major strategy documents 
Collections 
Collection strategy 
Open archives 
Other archive facilities and special collections
8.17 External and community relations
Alumni 
Community Relations 
Development activities 
Public Relations
8.18 Government and regulator relations
Funding body statistical reports and returns 
Other statutory reports 
Information on student admission, progression and completion
More information is available in the Commissioner's Guide to Publication Schemes, available from the Scottish Commissioner's website.

8.1 General information
This category covers general information about how to make contact with Edinburgh Napier University.

8.2 Access to information and records management policies
This category tells people how to request information from Edinburgh Napier University, both under the FOI (Scotland) Act and the Data Protection Act.

8.3 Governance
This category covers information relating to the way Edinburgh Napier University is governed and how decisions are made.

8.4 Financial resources
This category covers information on Edinburgh Napier University's strategy and management of financial resources.

8.5 Corporate planning
This category covers information on Edinburgh Napier University's mission and major strategic plans.

8.6 Procurement
Collaborative procurements may be led by central bodies such as Procurement Scotland, APUC Limited and so on.

8.7 Management of research
This category covers information relating to Edinburgh Napier University's management and funding of its research activities.

8.8 Commercialisation and knowledge transfer
This category provides information relating to our mechanisms for supporting the commercialisation of outputs from its research activities.

8.9 Human resources
This category covers information on Edinburgh Napier University's strategy and management of human resources.

8.10 Physical resources (includes our estate and environmental policies)
This category covers information ata strategic level relating to Edinburgh Napier University's management of its physical resources.

8.11 Health and safety
This category covers information about Edinburgh Napier University's health & safety and risk assessment policies, procedures and record.

8.12 Equality and diversity
This category provides information about Edinburgh Napier University's policies and strategies regarding equality and diversity.

8.13 Support for disabled people
This category covers information about Edinburgh Napier University's policies, procedures and support for disabled people.

8.14 Student administration and support
This category contains information on how Edinburgh Napier University manages the administration and progression of our students.

8.15 Teaching quality
This category contains information regarding the management of teaching quality in Edinburgh Napier University.

8.16 Information services
This category covers those functions within Edinburgh Napier University that provide access to information.

8.17 External and community relations
This category covers information relating to Edinburgh Napier University's relationship with its external environment.

8.18 Government and regulator relations
This category covers the information we give to government, external regulators and information provided to the Scottish Funding Council.

Edinburgh Napier is currently offering a 20% discount on Masters tuition fees to our graduates for year one of their full-time postgraduate degree. Please read our T&C's below before submitting an application.
Terms and Conditions
The Edinburgh Napier University Graduate Discount Scheme offers a 20% reduction in tuition fee costs to alumni who have graduated with an undergraduate or postgraduate taught degree from Edinburgh Napier University or any of its antecedent institutions. Students who have completed a period of study at Edinburgh Napier as part of an Exchange or Study Abroad Year, are also eligible to apply for the discount.

The Graduate Discount Scheme is available to Home, EU, RUK and overseas students and can be applied to full-time, part-time and distance learning modes of study. However, Overseas-delivered and programmes taught in conjunction with other universities are excluded from this scheme.

The discount is applied to the tuition fee element of the programme costs ONLY. It is not applied to any additional costs, including research costs and fieldwork fees.

The discount applies only to the portion of the tuition fee which the student is personally responsible for paying; including payment via a SAAS Postgraduate Loan, Commercial Bank Loan or other personal payment method. Any portion of the tuition fees being paid for by an employer, government, or external sponsor will not be eligible for the discount.

Tuition fees which are being paid in-full by an employer, government or external sponsor are excluded from the Graduate Discount Scheme. The fee reduction is only applicable on the full rate of fee as published on our website; any student who is enrolling on a programme via a third party partner with an alternative fee structure is not eligible to receive the discount.

The Graduate Discount Scheme applies to new Postgraduate students starting on a January, September or May intake programmes only. The discount cannot be applied retrospectively. The discount can only be applied to year one of a full-time Postgraduate degree, any additional years are exempt from the discount. For part time Postgraduate degrees the discount will apply to years one, two and three only. Any additional years will be exempt from the discount.

Withdrawal from a course will result in a refund of the self-funded portion of the tuition fees only. This will be calculated pro-rata.

Applicants must make it clear on their application that they would like to be considered for the Graduate Discount Scheme. Applicants must provide evidence that they are, or will be, an Edinburgh Napier Graduate by the dates stated above for the course intake month applied for. Educational Qualification Certificates or Transcripts are requested as part of the application process and should provide adequate proof of achieved or pending alumni status.

Applicants who have completed any of the following undergraduate and postgraduate taught degrees at Edinburgh Napier University are eligible to apply for the Graduate Discount Scheme.

Any of the following as a bachelor’s degree (SCQF level 9), a bachelor’s degree with distinction (SCQF level 9), a bachelor’s degree with honours (SCQF level 10) or a Masters degree (SCQF level 11):

Bachelor of Arts (BA)
Bachelor of Design (BDes)
Bachelor of Education (BEd)
Bachelor of Engineering (BEng)
Bachelor of Midwifery (BMid)
Bachelor of Music (BMus)
Bachelor of Nursing (BNurs)
Bachelor of Science (BSc)
Bachelor of Laws (LLB)
The degree of Master of Arts (MA)
The degree of Master of Business Administration (MBA)
The degree of Master of Design (MDes)
The degree of Master of Fine Arts (MFA)
The degree of Master of Laws (LLM)
The degree of Master of Music (MMus)
The degree of Master of Science (MSc)
The following postgraduate programmes of study are eligible programmes for the Graduate Discount Scheme:

The degree of Master of Arts (MA)
The degree of Master of Business Administration (MBA)
The degree of Master of Design (MDes)
The degree of Master of Fine Arts (MFA)
The degree of Master of Laws (LLM)
The degree of Master of Music (MMus)
The degree of Master of Science (MSc)
Masters by Research (MA by Res or MSc by Res)
The following postgraduate programmes of study are excluded from the Graduate Discount Scheme:

All Postgraduate Certificate programmes
All Postgraduate Diploma programmes, including Postgraduate Diploma in Education.
Masters Top Up
Pre-registration Nursing and Midwifery programmes, including Masters in Nursing and Masters in Midwifery.
Programmes delivered in collaboration with other higher education establishments
CPD (continuing professional development) programmes are also excluded unless you are enrolled to complete one of the eligible taught postgraduate qualifications.
Contact us
Contact our advisers on 0333 900 6040 or use our online enquiry form


Home Privacy policyFacebook Twitter LinkedIn Email
Edinburgh Napier University ("We") are committed to protecting your privacy and have adopted this privacy policy to set out the basis on which your personal information is collected, processed and used.
Data Protection
Edinburgh Napier University is, and always has been, committed to respecting your privacy and protecting your personal information. As the Data Controller of the personal data we collect, we have policies, procedures and privacy notices in place under the UK Data Protection Act 2018 and UK General Data Protection Regulation (UK-GDPR) (which together are referred to as the “Data Protection legislation” below).

For more information on what information we use and how we collect and use it, please see our Data Protection pages using the following links:

Data Protection Policy statement and Code of Practice
Privacy Notices
By using our Website you understand and agree to the collection and use of your information as outlined in this Privacy Policy. If this statement is changed we will post these changes on this page .

If you have any questions regarding the use of your personal data or want to know more about your rights under the legislation or how the University complies with the legislation please contact the Data Protection Officer at dataprotection@napier.ac.uk.

Information we may collect from you
We may collect and process the following data about you:
Information that you provide by filling in forms on our website www.napier.ac.uk (the "Website")
Details of applications you make through our Website
If you contact us, including via our online enquiry service, we may keep a record of that correspondence
Details of your visits to our Website and the resources that you access
We may ask you to complete surveys that we use for research purposes although you do not have to respond to them.
If you submit personal information to us, for example your name and email address, we may link this information with any other information we have collected about you.

If you choose to contact us by other methods e.g. email, phone, letter, etc. we will also process your personal data to respond to you and provide any services or goods in connection with your contact/enquiry/request. Please see our Privacy Notices for more specific information.

We may engage in marketing activities which use your personal data. This could include sharing data with third party operated social networks such as Meta, where this information is matched against the social network’s own databases in order to provide you with the most relevant information.  

The details you provide will not be used for advertising purposes unless you have expressly consented to having your details used in this way.

Edinburgh Napier use of visitor statistics
When you visit our website our systems automatically collects information about your computer, including where available your IP address (a unique number assigned to your computer when you are using your browser on the internet), operating system and browser type to monitor customer traffic patterns and website usage.
 
This statistical data does not contain any personally identifiable information about you or any of our users. It is used to enhance the design and layout of the Website making it easier to navigate.
These statistics are very much like television ratings that tell the networks how many people tuned in to a particular programme. We only use this type of data in aggregate i.e. we look at the data collectively, in summary form, rather than on an individual basis.

Some of this non-identifiable data may be passed to a third party GDPR-compliant data visualisation provider, Supermetrics. 

We use these to integrate user engagement data from channels such as Google Analytics and Facebook. This provides us with a single report on multiple channels at once. These reports tell us which channels are the most useful and engaging for our users and help the University make decisions on which channels are the most effective to reach our audiences in the future. 

Supermetrics deals with encrypted data only that is not personally identifiable to individual users. The encrypted data is not held by them any longer than it takes to provide the data visualisation reports.
Read more about Supermetric's security and data privacy commitments.

Cookies
We use cookies to collect our statistics about your visit. Cookies are small text files that are placed on your computer and are widely used in order to make websites work, or work more efficiently, as well as to provide information to the owners of the site.
We will also collect any information you give to us through our submission forms, like our contact form. If you submit information to us, including a name and email address, we may link this information with the information we have automatically collected about you.
Please view the University's Statement on the Use of Cookies for detailed information on the cookies we use and the purposes for which we use them.

Where we store your personal data
The data that we collect from you may be transferred to, and stored at, a destination outside the UK and European Economic Area ("EEA"). It may also be processed by staff operating outside the UK and EEA who work for us or for one of our suppliers. By submitting your personal data, you understand and agree to this transfer, storing or processing.
We will take all steps reasonably necessary to ensure that your data is treated securely and in accordance with this privacy policy. Where we have given you (or where you have chosen) a password which enables you to access certain parts of our site, you are responsible for keeping this password confidential. We ask you not to share a password with anyone.
Usage made of the information
The information you have given us will be stored on our computer systems and used in the following ways:
Marketing: In order that we may keep you informed by post, email, telephone or other electronic means of the news, events or services that may be of interest (provided you have opted-in to receive such communications). You can opt out at any time
Web statistics: To improve the service to our clients and to analyse our Website's use without identifying you as an individual
Market Research: From time to time we may ask you to take part in research surveys to assist us with improving our service to existing and potential students
Processing applications made by you
To carry out our obligations to you, such as notifying you about changes to our terms and conditions
Legal Bases for Processing
The legal bases the University relies upon primarily are:

Article 6(1)(e): for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of the official authority vested in the controller, namely the University’s Statutory Instruments: “for the objects of providing education, carrying out research, and promoting teaching, research and general scholarship” and the administration and support thereof. We rely on this legal basis for dealing with enquiries and sending service messages relative to your enquiry; processing applications; using website statistics to improve our website and services; marketing research and carrying out other associated obligations.
Article 6(1)(b): processing is necessary in order to take steps at the request of the data subject (prior to entering into a contract or, in this case, making an application to the University), including corresponding with you about your application and keeping you informed of further information related to your application to the University. The possible/consequences of failure to provide/process the personal data requested are that the University would be unable to provide the goods/services/information you have requested.
Article 6(1)(a); the University asks for your consent to send you electronic marketing, other than service messages related to your enquiry/application. You have the option to unsubscribe from marketing messages at any time by clicking on the ‘unsubscribe’ link in the marketing message or updating your settings in your social media account. Increasingly, browsers and operating systems also allow marketing preferences to be changed or blocked.
Article 6(1)(f): The University relies upon legitimate interests, as the legal basis for operating web filtering and other system scanning and protection systems and services in order to protect the University’s website and network, as it is in the legitimate interests of the Controller to protect its information systems from misuse. 
Further information about the legal bases used for specific purposes can be found on our main Privacy Notice page: staff.napier.ac.uk/dpstatements.
Disclosure of your information
Subject to the exceptions set out below, we will not disclose your personal information to third parties including other constituents of Edinburgh Napier University unless we are allowed, or required, to by law.
We may disclose your personal information:

To comply with any legal obligation e.g. search warrant, subpoena, court order.
To protect the rights, property, or safety of Edinburgh Napier University or others (this includes exchanging information with companies and organisations for purposes of fraud protection and credit risk reduction).
To investigate reports of users sending material using a false email address or users sending harassing, threatening, or abusive messages.
To protect against misuse or unauthorised use of our Website.
During emergencies, e.g. when we believe someone's physical safety is at risk.
Accepting this statement acknowledges that we will not be responsible for damages you or any others may suffer as a result of the disclosure of your personal information in accordance with the above.

Rights and access to information
The Data Protection legislation gives you certain rights, including the right to access information held about you. For further information about how to exercise your rights please see our Data Protection Rights Guide.
Security
Even the best policy cannot protect your online privacy and security in all circumstances. Your best protection is to understand the limits to privacy on the Internet and use common sense in all of your online activities. Be aware that email is an inherently insecure form of communication. Remember that in extreme cases third parties are sometimes able to intercept your unencrypted messages.
Edinburgh Napier University is concerned about the security of your personal information particularly when using our Website. Although we have taken all reasonable security precautions, we cannot guarantee internet security and subsequently cannot guarantee that any information you input on our Website is totally secure. In addition to our online security efforts, we have taken steps to protect your personal data offline as well. All of your information is restricted to our offices. Employees are granted access on a need-to-know basis and are kept up-to-date on our security and privacy practices.

Your control over your personal information
At any time you can withdraw permission for the use of your personal information. This can be done either by ticking the OPT-OUT or UNSUBSCRIBE link contained in all Edinburgh Napier University web communications, or alternatively, by sending an email requesting this to dataprotection@napier.ac.uk. 
Our Website may, from time to time, contain links to and from other websites. If you follow a link to any of these websites, please note that these websites have their own privacy policies and that we do not accept any responsibility or liability for these policies.

Enquiry, application & alumni processes
If you wish to enquire or apply to Edinburgh Napier University you will be asked to submit your details into our customer databases. When you do this you will have the option to 'opt-in' to receiving e-newsletters and other communications from us. You can unsubscribe from these by clicking the unsubscribe link or by sending an email to info@napier.ac.uk with REMOVE in the subject line.
We also have a press news list which you can join by emailing EdNapierNews@Napier.ac.uk. To unsubscribe from this list email EdNapierNews@napier.ac.uk with REMOVE in the subject line.

We maintain a database of our alumni and proactively keep them engaged about our alumni services. Find out more about how the University handles alumni data here.

Events registration on externally hosted services
Please note that by registering for an event via a service such as Eventbrite (which will host your data out with the EEA) or Bookitbee (which will host your data in the EEA) you will be supplying your personal data to the company/website and as such you are accepting and consenting to the practices in their Privacy Policies.

Edinburgh Napier University is not affiliated with these companies/websites in any way and is using their services solely for the purposes of facilitating event ticketing and registration and does not accept any responsibility or liability for personal data which you have chosen to provide to such third party sites.

Further information
Privacy Notices for Students, Staff and all other ‘layered’ Privacy Notices can be accessed online here.

For further information, please see the University's Data Protection Policy Statement

How to contact us
In writing to:
Governance Services

Edinburgh Napier University

Sighthill Campus

EH11 4BN

Email: dataprotection@napier.ac.uk 

Last updated: March 2023

Padlocked Notebook PCData Protection Policy Statement
 

Edinburgh Napier University (“the University”) is committed to protecting the rights and freedoms of individuals with respect to the processing of their personal data. This is done in accordance with: 

Data Protection legislation (“the legislation”), now known as the UK GDPR.  The Privacy and Electronic Communications (Amendments etc) (EU Exit) Regulations 2019 amended the EU General Data Protection Regulation 2016 (EU GDPR) and together with the Data Protection Act 2018 the legislation is now known as the “UK GDPR” and referred to as “the legislation” below. 
Associated legislation, in light of relevant case law and appropriate guidance (e.g. from the ICO)
The University’s registration with the UK Information Commissioner. 


1. Compliance
1.1  All individuals (employees, students, agents, associates, contracted parties both paid and unpaid, etc.) processing personal data on behalf of the University are required to comply with:

Data protection law

The University’s Data Protection Code of Practice, Information Security and Manual Data Security Policies 

Associated University policies, procedures and guidance on the provisions and practical implementation of the legislation




1.2  These requirements apply to all personal data created and received, regardless of where it is held and irrespective of the ownership of the equipment used, if the processing is for the University’s purposes. 



1.3  Any breach of the University’s policies, procedures or guidance may result in liability for the University and internal disciplinary action being taken. 



2. Responsibilities
2.1  All employees and agents processing personal data for and on behalf of the University are responsible for ensuring that any such processing complies with the legislation.



2.2  All line managers are responsible for ensuring that the processing of personal data carried out in their School/Service Area is compliant with the legislation and that employees reporting to them are aware of their responsibilities under the legislation and have received training.



2.3  Governance Services​ and the Data Protection Officer (DPO) are responsible for overseeing compliance, developing guidance and providing advice and training to employees.



2.4  The University Secretary has overall responsibility for ensuring that the University complies with data protection and associated legislation



3. The Data Protection Principles 
The Data Protection legislation sets out six principles governing the use of personal information with which all University users must comply unless an exemption applies. These principles ensure that personal information is: 

1)  Processed fairly, lawfully and transparently
2)  Processed for limited purposes 

3)  Adequate, relevant and limited to what is required only (data minimisation)

4)  Accurate and up to date

5)  Not kept for longer than is necessary for the purposes it was collected and processed for (storage limitation)

6)  Kept securely using both technical and organisational measures (integrity and confidentiality) 



Additionally, there are requirements to:








7)  Keep written records of processing to demonstrate compliance (accountability)

8)  Process personal in line with individuals’ rights

9)  Not transfer personal data to other countries without adequate protection



The University's Data Protection Code of Practice provides further information and is available at:  Data Protection Code of Practice.



Special Category (Sensitive) and Criminal Conviction Personal Data Processing
The University processes special category data, as defined in Article 9 of the UK General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). We also process some criminal offence data, as defined in Article 10 of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and section 11(2) of the Data Protection Act 2018 (DPA 2018). This data must be processed in accordance with the requirements of the GDPR and, where applicable, Schedule 1 of the Data Protection Act 2018 (DPA 2018).



Some of the conditions for processing special category and criminal offence data, as set out in DPA 2018 Schedule 1, require us to have an Appropriate Policy Document (APD) in place. The APD must set out and explain our procedures for securing compliance with the principles in Article 5 of the GDPR and our policies regarding the retention and erasure of such personal data.



1. Purpose
1.1 This document explains our processing in relation to special category and criminal offence data and satisfies the requirement to have an APD in place, as set out in Schedule 1, Part 4 of the DPA 2018.



2. Scope
2.1 This policy applies to all processing of special category or criminal offence data, undertaken by or on behalf of the University, which is based on a condition in Schedule 1 of the DPA which requires an APD.



2.2 Special category data is defined at Article 9 of the GDPR as personal data revealing:

Racial or ethnic origin;
Political opinions;
Religious or philosophical beliefs;
Trade union membership;
Genetic data;
Biometric data for the purpose of uniquely identifying a natural person;
Data concerning health; or
Data concerning a natural person’s sex life or sexual orientation.


2.3 ‘Criminal conviction data’ covers processing in relation to criminal convictions and offences or related security measures. It also includes personal data relating to the alleged commission of offences or proceedings for an offence committed or alleged to have been committed, including sentencing.



3. Conditions for Processing
3.1 We process special categories of personal data as set out in the University’s Privacy Notices, available online.



4. Compliance with the Principles
4.1 Principle (a): lawfulness, fairness and transparency

We have put in place appropriate measures to ensure we meet this principle. These include:

ensuring that we always meet relevant lawful basis/bases for processing, including at least one of the conditions in Schedule 1, where required;
providing clear and transparent information about why we process personal data including our lawful basis for processing in the University Privacy Notices and
setting out our main processing activities in the University Privacy Notices


4.2 Principle (b): purpose limitation

Our purposes for processing are set out in the University Privacy Notices.

We will not process personal data for purposes incompatible with the original purpose it was collected for.



4.3 Principle (c): data minimisation

We collect personal data necessary for the relevant purposes and ensure it is not excessive. The information we process is necessary for and proportionate to our purposes. Where personal data is provided to us or obtained by us, but is not relevant to our stated purposes, we will erase it.



4.4 Principle (d): accuracy

Where we become aware that personal data is inaccurate or out of date, having regard to the purpose for which it is being processed, we will take every reasonable step to ensure that data is erased or rectified without delay. If we decide not to either erase or rectify it, for example because the lawful basis we rely on to process the data means these rights don’t apply, we will document our decision.



4.5 Principle (e): storage limitation

All special category or criminal conviction data processed by us is retained for the periods set out in the University Records Retention Schedules. Retention periods for this data are based on our business needs, best practice and/or legal obligations. Our retention schedules are reviewed regularly and updated when necessary.



4.6 Principle (f): integrity and confidentiality (security)

Electronic information is processed within our secure network. For services provided locally by Information Services, information is stored on servers located in secure University data centres. These data centres are resilient and feature access controls, environmental monitoring, backup power supplies and redundant hardware. Information on these servers is backed up regularly. The University has various data protection and information security policies and procedures to ensure that appropriate organisational and technical measures are in place to protect the privacy or your personal data. The University makes use of a number of third party, including “cloud”, services for information storage and processing. Through procurement and contract management procedures the University ensures that these services have appropriate organisational and technical measures to comply with data protection legislation. Specific local processes include secured paper forms and files, password protected e-files, encrypted emails, etc. and the use of third party systems which the University ensures have the necessary technical and organisational security and contractual measures in place to protect the data.



Hard copy information is processed in line with appropriate security procedures. Both our electronic systems and physical storage have appropriate access controls applied.



The systems we use to process personal data allow us to erase or update personal data at any point in time, where required.



4.7 Accountability principle

We have put in place appropriate technical and organisational measures to meet the requirements of accountability. These include:

the appointment of a Data Protection Officer who has a direct reporting line to the University Secretary;
taking a ‘data protection by design and default’ approach to our activities;
maintaining documentation of our processing activities;
adopting and implementing data protection policies and ensuring we have written contracts in place with our data processors;
implementing appropriate security measures in relation to the personal data we process; and
carrying out data protection impact assessments for our high risk processing and where otherwise deemed helpful.
We regularly review our accountability measures and update or amend them where required.



5. Retention
5.1 The University’s Record Retention Schedules are available here.



Contact
Queries about this policy can be directed to Governance Services at dataprotection@napier.ac.uk

​​Procedure for Breach of Data Security
 

It is important that action is taken as soon as possible following a data incident or breach to try to rectify the situation and mitigate any risks to data subjects. Tell your line manager, Governance Services or Information Services (as appropriate) - DON'T leave it...the sooner we know, the sooner we can do something about it!
 

Data Protection legislation governs the University's obligations with regard to personal data and these include a requirement to keep personal data secure. A breach of data security occurs where unauthorised or unintentional access to personal data is gained, whether this data is held in electronic or manual format. This procedure gives guidance on what to do in the event of such a breach occurring.

 

Immediate actions for an email breach/incident
 

If you send an email or email attachment in error the following are the steps you need to take to rectify it:

Don't Panic! 

Send us the email as an attachment. 
Copy the email from your sent items (click on it and press the Ctrl + C keys) and paste it into a new email as an attachment (click into the body of the new email and press the Ctrl + V keys) and send this email to dataprotection@napier.ac.uk, CC'ing ISServiceDesk@napier.ac.uk, explaining what's happened and asking for the message to be deleted from the servers (if possible).

The email should be titled "Data incident".

It is important that a copy of the original email is provided as an attachment, not forwarded, as the attachment will contain metadata which will assist IS in finding it and removing it.

Please note: Deleting emails from the servers only deals with internal email, NOT external email.

Please attempt to recall the item. 
See Recall or replace a sent email (microsoft.com) for more details.

Governance Services Data Protection team will assess the incident and decide on the course of action to be taken. The Data Protetcion team will provide appropriate template wording​ if you are required to contact any individuals concerned. ​

Please DO NOT forward, reply or "reply all" to the original email sent in error!

Complete the Data Protection Incident / Breach reporting form below and send this to: dataprotection@napier.ac.uk.
 ​DP_Incident_Breach_reporting_form.docx (internal)


Procedure for a Brea​ch of Personal Data Security

Download the Procedure for a Breach of Personal Data Security​. 

  Page last updated 16 August 2023​​​​
​CCTV and Similar Surveillance EquipmentQuis custodiet ipsos custodes?
 

CCTV Code of Practice
The University uses CCTV across its campuses to ensure site security and the safety of staff, students and visitors. Since these systems invariably require the processing of personal data, their use must comply with the Data Protection Legislation. In accordance with guidance from the UK Information Commissioner, the University has adopted the following Code of Practice for the use of CCTV:

 

Download the CCTV Code of Practice in PDF format.

 

 A link to the CCTV section of the University's Data Protection Code of Practice is available here: http://napierstaff.napier.ac.uk/services/governance-compliance/governance/DataProtection/CodeofPractice/Pages/CCTV.aspx 

 

Requests for CCTV images
 

Request by data subjects for CCTV images
Data Protection legislation gives individuals the right of access to their personal data, which includes CCTV images. Information on how to request these images is provided in these Guidance Notes, together with a request form which can be used to make a request.

 

Request by third parties for CCTV images
Requests for images of third parties made by the Police or authorities with prosecuting powers will be dealt with under Data Protection legislation. Any other third party requests will be treated as requests under the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002. Please refer to section 12.3 of the University’s CCTV Code of Practice for further information and guidance.

 

All types of requests for CCTV images should be submitted to:

Facilities Services Manager

Room 6.B.22

Sighthill Campus

Edinburgh

EH11 4BN

 

Individuals Requesting CCTV Footage
As CCTV is very intrusive it is classed as high risk by the UK Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) (further information here: https://ico.org.uk/your-data-matters/cctv/). The reason for this is that operators, as Data Controllers, have no control over what data they are collecting using the cameras e.g. the personal data of numerous individuals, and therefore this is very tightly controlled and restricted, and the University adheres to the Code of Practice mentioned above. Data Protection legislation allows Data Controllers to give individuals access to their own personal data, that is images of themselves only, but it does not allow Controllers to give access to anyone else’s data, unless that processing is covered by either a legal basis or an exemption in the legislation. Whilst there are exemptions for crime and fraud, there are also conditions attached which state that such disclosures are only to be made to “competent authorities” e.g. the Police, and therefore the University would be breaking the law if it allowed individuals to view CCTV footage which contains the images and personal data of the many other individuals whose image/s may be captured in the footage being requested.

Where personal data is requested under data protection legislation and a formal subject access request made, the University is required to obscure/anonymise/pixelate all the other images, including registration plates and identifying features if they constitute the personal data of other individuals - this would be an extremely time consuming and costly exercise for which the University would charge.  

The University is only be able to release time limited full footage to a “competent authority” e.g. the Police, and only after they have submitted an official request form. If you have been the victim of a crime, including a motor vehicle accident/damage, please contact the Police and report it - they will submit their official request to the University for consideration. Further guidance is available here: http://napierstaff.napier.ac.uk/services/governance-compliance/governance/DataProtection/CodeofPractice/Pages/DataSharing02.aspx

 
 
                                                                                                                   Page last updated 2 December 2021

​​

​​Cloud Computing Services
 

The UK Information Commissioner (ICO) has published guidance on cloud computing services which includes this definition: ‘cloud computing services offer organisations access to a range of technologies and service models typically delivered over the internet’. In the accompanying overview, the ICO states:

 

‘Organisations that maintain and manage their own computer infrastructure may be considering a move to cloud computing to take advantage of a range of benefits that may be achieved such as increased security, reliability and resilience for a potentially lower cost.

 

By processing data in the cloud an organisation may encounter risks to data protection that they were previously unaware of. It is important that data controllers take time to understand the data protection risks that cloud computing presents’.

 

Information Services offer internally hosted cloud services which staff and students must consider first before then investigating the transfer of personal data (or confidential / commercially sensitive University information) to an externally hosted service. If it is agreed that the University is unable to provide what is required, any staff member intending to use an external service must:

Refer to the ICO’s guidance and in particular the checklist at s.98 which covers these headings: ‘Risks, Confidentiality, Integrity, Availability & Legal’
Consider and where necessary seek legal advice on the terms of the agreement with the cloud provider
Ensure they can demonstrate that they can satisfy the legal requirements of signing up to the service
Seek the written approval of their line manager
Consult the Information Governance Manager
 

Using Cloud Computing Services for events management or advising students about advertised Cloud Services
In response to the increasing use by staff of external cloud computing services for ticketing/event registration purposes and organisations which are advertising or offering their services to the student community, this specific guidance on these types of services and what you should do with them has been developed.

 

                                                                                                                    Page last updated 28 March 2019
Consent / Disclosure Forms
 

Image of man signing form
Permission to Disclose Personal Data
The Data Protection Legislation allows the University to share a subject's personal data with other areas of the University and third parties, where the subject has given their consent (Please note: consent is not the only legal basis that can be used).  This form should be used to ensure that there is a written record of the subject's informed consent which is then to be retained as specified on the form.  Further guidance on data sharing is available in Section 8 of the Code of Practice and on the Data Sharing documents page.

 

Download the form for Permission to Disclose Personal Data​

 

 

Permission to Disclose Sensitive Personal Data
The requirements for processing sensitive personal data, such as information relating to racial or ethnic origin, health issues or criminal convictions, are more stringent and such data may only be disclosed with the express written consent of the subject. This template consent form should be used when such a disclosure is proposed.

 

Download the form for Permission to Disclose Sensitive Personal Data

 

 

Consent form for student projects, reports and dissertations (except PhDs)
As the University likes to provide exemplars of good work for the benefit of future students, consent to do this must be sought from the relevant students, using this consent form

 

Other considerations in making student work available are:

Can you completely anonymise the work? Students could still be identified from their work even if e.g. their names or other identifiers were removed. Would any of the work have been generated e.g. whilst a student was on placement? If so, is any of this confidential to  the placement provider and/or are they aware of the purposes for which the student’s work would be used?
The consent form refers to a retention period for the piece of work and therefore you should put measures in place to ensure you can comply with this
You should also think about:

Whether any of the work concerns or refers to other living identifiable individuals for which there would be third party data implications
How you make future students aware of copyright/plagiarism issues, including the University’s use of Turnitin for text matching purposes
How you would intend to make the exemplars available
                                                                                                                   Page last reviewed 29 March 2019
​Interaction between Data Protection Legislation and the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002
 Image of clockwords

Data Protection Legislation (DPA 2018 and the GDPR) and Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act (FOISA) are both concerned with information but they have different and at times conflicting purposes. Data Protection legislation protects individuals' rights to privacy and fair processing of their personal data, whilst FOISA provides people with rights of access to the information held by public sector bodies. Data Protection legislation and FOISA therefore operate alongside each other but their interaction could be potentially complex.  This guidance note provides a comparison between the scope of the two acts, and an introduction to their interaction.


Download the Interaction between DPA and FOISA Guidance Note

 

Further information on the interaction between Data Protection legislation and the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act, and with other legislation, can be found in the Data Protection Code of Practice.

 

For further information and guidance on the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act, please see

Governance Services' Freedom of Information site.

​The Data Protection Principles
 

The GDPR sets out seven principles governing the use of personal information. The main purpose of these principles is to protect the interests of the individuals whose personal data is being processed by the University and they apply to everything we do with personal data, unless an exemption applies.

Image of padlock and PC screen

 

These principles ensure that personal information is:

 

1. Processed fairly, lawfully and transparently

 

2.  Collected for specified, explicit and legitimate purposes and not further processed in a manner that is incompatible with these purposes

 

3.  Adequate, relevant and limited

 

4.  Accurate and up to date

 

5.  Kept in a form which permits identification of data subjects for no longer than is necessary

 

6.  Processed in a manner that ensures appropriate security

 

7.  The Controller shall be responsible for and demonstrate accountability

 

The full provisions governing these principles are available in Article 5 of the GDPR

 

Further guidance is available on the UK Information Commissioner's website https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-the-general-data-protection-regulation-gdpr/principles/ 

 

UK Information Commissioner's Guidance on Personal Data
There are several steps to determining whether data (electronic or manual) is personal data for the purposes of Data Protection legislation. Guidance can be found on the UK Information Commissioner's website https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-the-general-data-protection-regulation-gdpr/key-definitions/what-is-personal-data/ 

 

 

Page last reviewed 29 March 2019

Data Sharing 
Further information on data sharing is available in Section 8 of the Data Protection Code of Practice. 

 

Man with oversized envelope
Required Disclosures to Third Parties
The University may be required by legislation, by any rule of law or by the order of a court to disclose an individual's personal data. This document gives a list of examples of third parties who may require disclosure, and the circumstances under which they may do so.  Please note that this list is non-exhaustive.  A checklist for data sharing is available below, and further guidance is given in Section 8 of the University's Data Protection Code of Practice.  If you have any queries, please contact the Information Governance Manager. 

 

  Download the Table of Third Parties who can require disclosure of personal data

 

Environmental Health Officers have powers to obtain information for the purpose of reporting notifiable diseases.  A list of notifiable diseases can be downloaded  here.

 

Permitted Disclosures to Third Parties
The University may receive requests to disclose an individual's personal data, which while not required, may be permitted under Data Protection Legislation. This document gives a list of examples of third parties who may request disclosure of personal data, and the circumstances under which such data may be disclosed.  Please note that this list is non-exhaustive.  A checklist for data sharing is available below, and further guidance is given in Section 8 of the University's Data Protection Code of Practice.  If you have any queries, please contact the Information Governance Manager.

 

 Download the Table of Third parties who may request personal data

 

Internal Data Sharing
 
Please see section 8.4 of the Data Protection Code of Practice
 

External Data Sharing
Sharing personal data externally will require either a contract, data sharing agreement, data processing agreement or a collaboration agreement depending on who the data is being shared with and the purpose. If you do not have any of these in place or it is a new process contact Governance Services for template documents and guidance.
Sharing data without any of the above agreements in place could be, or could lead to, a data breach.
A Privacy Impact Assessment will also be required.
Download the Data Processing Agreement Checklist
Download the Data Sharing Agreement Checklist
Download the Staff checklist for Data Sharing with Third Parties 
 
All Processors contracting with the University to process data on behalf of the University (Controller) whether that is by actual transfer of personal data to them or by the provision of systems or services are subject to the University's Data Processing Terms and Conditions. There are various versions dependent on the situation:

Processors in the UK: ​​DATA_PROCESSING TERMS AND CONDITIONS (in UK)​
            Yellow highlighted sections to be included in Principal Contract/procurement documentation                           (responsibility of colleague outsourcing processing, not Procurement or Governance Services)                                see pages 1 (points A & B), 4 (point 5.7) and 7 (point 14)
​Controllers in the UK and Adequate Countries:  DATA SHARING AGREEMENT GENERAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS
            To be used with the appropriate Data Sharing Agreement
Controllers and Processors outwith the UK and Adequate Countries: INTERNATIONAL DATA TRANSFER AGREEMENT - PART 4 MANDATORY CLAUSES​
             To be used with the completed clauses parts 1 to 3


The signatory for Edinburgh Napier University must have appropriate powers under the University’s Schedule of Delegated Financial Authority: Schedule of Delegated Financial Authority (napier.ac.uk).​​


How to Share Data
SharePoint should be used for sharing personal data, as this is the most secure method, speak to Information Services for guidance on how to do this.
If you are unable to use SharePoint read the Information Security Classification Scheme for other methods and contact Governance Services for guidance before sharing any data.
 
Guidance on the Contractual Requirements for Transferring Personal Data to External Organisations
This guidance note provides general advice on the issues you need to consider when setting up or managing contracts where you intend to transfer personal information from the University to another organisation. This is to ensure that you do so in a way that complies with the Data Protection legislation.


Download the Guidance on the Contractual Requirements for Transferring Personal Data to External Organisations


Download the larger format flowchart from the Guidance Note 

  Destruction of Personal Data
 

Further guidance on the retention and destruction of records containing personal data is available in Section 20 of the Data Protection Code of Practice.

 

 Shredded documents

Guidance on the Safe Disposal of Confidential Waste
The Data Protection Act and the Freedom of Information Act impose specific requirements about the timely and secure disposal of information, both paper and electronic. This guidance note sets out what you need to know.

 

Download the Guidance on Safe Disposal of Confidential Waste

 
Retention and Destruction of Records
The University has to ensure that it has complied with statutory requirements for the retention of records under Data Protection Legislation (GDPR and DPA 2018), Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act or Environmental Information Regulations. Guidance on the retention and then destruction of records is available above in the guidance note on the Safe Disposal of Confidential Waste. When it has been established that a record can be destroyed a record of that destruction, the basis on which this was done (e.g. in accordance with a legal requirement) and the method used must be kept by the area in which the destruction took place. This is the University's form for this purpose.

 

Download the Record Disposal Form

 

The University's Records Retention Schedules provide further information relating to the retention and disposal of records, including personal data.

 

Destruction of Equipment Used to Process Personal Data
 

University provided equipment and BYOD
Equipment which has been used to process personal data must be disposed of in a confidential and secure manner to ensure that the data is completely wiped from the equipment and cannot be restored by any means. Normal file deletion processes are not adequate and over the years there have been many instances where the ICO have investigated breaches which have occurred through the re-sale or re-use of equipment which has not been fully wiped. For University equipment please complete the Redundant Equipment Notification form which can be found on the Procurement intranet pages.

 

If you are using your own equipment (laptops, phones, etc.) for work purposes please ensure that you do not download / process others' personal data (being processed on behalf of the University) onto that equipment. If you need to process personal data using your equipment log in using VPN or Virtual Desktop. If you do download personal data for which the University is the Data Controller then you must ensure that the equipment is securely and fully wiped/destroyed at the end of its life. See the 'Bring Your Own Device' Policy​. Note: Opening an attachment from Outlook when logged on using Office 365 (not through VPN/VD) is likely to store the document directly onto your device.

 

 New General Data Protection Regulation  
 

The new General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) places a number of new and different requirements and responsibilities on organisations. It's been called both ambitious and onerous and at 260 pages long it is certainly a substantial piece of legislation.
 
The implementation phase for the new General Data Protection Regulation started in May 2016, when it came into force, with the Regulation applying fully from the 25 May 2018. The UK Government retained the ability to introduce some derogations for special purposes and these form part of the Data Protection Act 2018(DPA 2018) which also commenced on the 25th of May 2018. The GDPR and the DPA 2018 together form the data protection legislation in the UK.
 
A lot of work has been done across the University, however there are a number of actions that staff should still be taking to ensure compliance. These are summarised below along with some of the key changes that the Regulation brings. Training and briefing sessions began in early 2017 and are still available - you can find details of these here. Please contact Governance Services if you have any queries.
 
Guidance from the regulator, UK Information Commissioner, is available online here.
 
Please let Governance Services know if you would like to be advised of future updates by emailing dataprotection@napier.ac.uk
 
1. Penalties
The maximum fine for the most serious infringements is now €20 million or 4% of annual global turnover. This means that the risks of processing personal data have increased substantially. There is a tiered system of fines and the UK Information Commissioner, who is the regulator, works out the level of penalty based on the severity of the breach, failures to implement technical and organisational measures to comply with the Regulation, the effects on the individuals whose data is involved, etc. There are also fines of up to €10 million or 2% of annual global turnover for failure to report a breach. Any member of staff who suspects that there has been a breach or there is the potential for a breach should contact Governance Services for guidance.
 
2. Definition of personal data
Personal data may now include online identifiers, device identifiers, cookie IDs, IP addresses, location data, etc. and special category (sensitive) personal data will include genetic and biometric data. This means that data which was previously not considered to be personal data, or to fall within the definition of personal data, now needs the additional protections given to personal data applied.
 
ACTION: Identify any information which your school/service area processes which may be encompassed by this expanded definition and ensure appropriate technical and organisational measures are in place to protect it whilst processed and stored within the University and when it is transferred/sent externally and internally.
 

3. Conditions for processing
The legal basis for processing personal data must be determined and documented for each different process/ activity (where personal data is processed). Organisations are required to demonstrate compliance by keeping records documenting all personal data processing activities detailing the purpose of the processing, the lawful basis (conditions/justification) for processing, who the data subjects are, details of any recipients that the data may be shared with, retention policies and security measures taken.
 
ACTION: Please contact Governance Services for advice. Each School/Service Area within the University needs to maintain a schedule of the personal data that they process which includes the information noted above. Governance Services will contact you in due course regarding a Data Protection Audit, which we are required to undertake.
 

4. Privacy Notices
New requirements for 'privacy notices' (also known as 'processing statements' or 'fair processing notices') means extensive information needs to be provided to individuals in clear and plain language, including the information required in 3. above, to demonstrate compliance e.g. the lawful basis for processing, who has access to the data/who it is shared with, purposes for processing, data subjects covered by the notice, retention period for data, security measures applied to the data, data subjects rights and how they can exercise their rights, etc.
 
ACTION: All privacy notices to be reviewed to ensure they are compliant. Please contact Governance Services for further guidance.
 

5. Contracts with Data Processors, including those who have access to personal data e.g. software providers
Legal compliance obligations are now imposed on data processors under the Regulation. Processors must guarantee and demonstrate compliance with the Regulation and sign binding written agreements. Processors are liable for any breach for which they are directly responsible.
 
ACTION: ALL contracts/arrangements with processors must be reviewed to ensure that a Data Sharing Agreement is included and the University is no longer liable for processors' actions.
 

6. Contracts with Data Processors (or other Data Controllers) holding personal data outside the European Economic Area (EEA)
For parties processing personal data in the US - on 1 August 2016 a new scheme, the EU-US Privacy Shield, became operational for companies processing EU/UK personal data in the US. Contracts must be reviewed to ensure that data processors are signed up to the scheme - if not this is a breach of current legislation. For further information see here.
For parties processing personal data outside the EEA, but not in the US or a third country which has been approved as having adequate protections in place - contracts must be reviewed to ensure that they include either a) standard data protection clauses adopted by the UK Information Commissioner, or b) approved binding corporate rules (BCR).
 

ACTION: Review ALL contracts/arrangements with third parties processing personal data outside the EEA or approved countries for which the University is the 'data controller'.
 

7. Privacy Impact Assessments (PIAs) for system design and/or procurement projects (Privacy by Design)
There will be a legal requirement to conduct 'Privacy Impact Assessments'  for all new processes/systems which process personal data. This is to be included as part of the project plan from the start of systems design and/or procurement. Governance Services have templates and guidance available, and will assist with guiding you through the process.
 
ACTION: If you are implementing new systems and processes please ensure that PIAs are considered as standard practice. This is a requirement with immediate effect as the systems are likely to be in place once the Regulation comes into force and will save doing the work retrospectively.
 

8. Consent, where this is required for processing personal data, including e-marketing
The controller must be able to demonstrate that consent has been 'freely given and is specific, informed and unambiguous' and hasn't been withdrawn. It must be as easy to withdraw consent as to give it. Systems should be in place to record consent/withdrawal to ensure that there is an effective audit trail. Comprehensive processing notices, mentioned in 4. above, must be provided to individuals. It is no longer possible to rely on pre-ticked consent boxes, 'opt-outs' or 'soft opt-ins'.
 
ACTION: Check that any e-marketing complies and ensure that where consent is relied on as the basis for processing this too is compliant with the legislation. Start asking for consent NOW, don't leave it until the new Regulation is in force.
 

9. Data Subject Rights - Data Portability
Individuals have the right to receive the personal data that they have provided in a 'commonly used and machine readable format.
 
ACTION: System administrators must ensure that data can be extracted from the systems they administer in a re-useable, open source format.
 

10. Data Subject Rights - Profiling
Individuals have the right not to be subject to a decision based solely on automated processing, including profiling, which has a significant or legal effect on them.
 
There is an obligation to inform individuals specifically about profiling activities and a prohibition on profiling based on sensitive personal data (unless explicit consent has been obtained).
 
The UK Information Commissioner will be providing further guidance in the near future - please let Governance Services know if you would like to be advised of future updates by emailing dataprotection@napier.ac.uk .
 
ACTION: Review any profiling activities to ensure they comply with the new requirements.
 

11. Data Subject Rights - Subject Access Requests and the 'Right to be Forgotten'
Individuals have the right to receive confirmation of whether or not their personal data is being processed, where this is taking place and for what purpose. The timescales for organisations to comply with subject access requests have been reduced to one month. 
 
There are increased rights for erasure of personal data which are not absolute rights and only apply in certain situations. Individuals can also potentially halt the processing of their data by third parties.
 
ACTION: Ensure records management processes and procedures are adequate to enable efficient identification and collection of personal data.
 
Data Protection considerations for Event Management (internal advice)

You will need to provide a secure way for attendees to provide their personal data for the purposes of registering for the event and to manage their personal data for the event thereafter. There are a number of systems that could be used. The University provides MS Forms, but a number of colleagues prefer to use Eventbrite (US data processing) or BookItBee (UK data processing)

If using Eventbrite, there is guidance online for using cloud services: https://napierstaff.napier.ac.uk/services/governance-compliance/governance/DataProtection/Pages/InternetServices.asp

You need to provide a disclaimer to the following effect: 

Please note that by registering for this event via [insert company name] [which will host your data outside the UK (in the USA) you will be supplying your personal data to the company/website and as such you are accepting and consenting to the practices in their Privacy Policy which can be accessed here [insert link]. Edinburgh Napier University is not affiliated with this company/website in any way, is using its services solely for the purposes of facilitating event ticketing and registration and does not accept any responsibility or liability for personal data which you have chosen to provide to such third party sites.’

This should be included on the email invitation and the Eventbrite registration page (just somewhere down the bottom).

You need to be providing your attendees with a Privacy Notice - a template is available on the "Privacy Notice" link in the left hand menu. Mandatory fields are:

1) Data Controller’s details

2) Legal Basis/es

3) Categories of recipients internally and externally (who personal data is shared with)

4) If personal data is transferred outside the UK

5) How long data will be retained or the rationale for retaining data

6) If any automated decision making or profiling is taking place

7) The following link: staff.napier.ac.uk/dpstatements for further information about processing and rights

 

You need to ask attendees to opt-in to the following (where necessary/relevant):

- sharing with external parties e.g. event organisers / sponsors (attendees must be advised of the purposes for this sharing)

- sharing delegate list with other delegates (again advise the purposes e.g. networking)

- receiving marketing / promotion of future events

 

Accessibility/dietary requirements – must be securely collected and stored e.g. in secure system or password protected document and destroyed once the purposes have been fulfilled. Potentially these could be held for up to 3 years in case there is a legal claim relating to equalities or personal injury e.g. issue caused by food.

 

Advise that data may be shared with appropriate colleagues internally.​



If the event will be recorded, filmed or photographed, guidance is available in the University's Data Protection Code of Practice - see the Filming and Photography section: https://staff.napier.ac.uk/services/governance-compliance/governance/DataProtection/CodeofPractice/Pages/PhotographyFilmRecording.aspx 

 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page last updated 1 August 2022​
Frequently Asked Questions
 

 Download the Frequently Asked Questions about Data Protection as a PDF document.

 

1. Can I share personal data within the University?

2. I've received a request from a parent. What can I tell them?

3. I've received a request for student data from a sponsor. What do I do?

4. A police officer is asking me for data about a student. What should I do?

5. I've been asked by an employer to verify a student's award. Can I do that?

6. ENSA / ENSA Advice have phoned me and asked me to confirm some student data. Can I do this?

7. How do I find out what personal data the University holds about me?

8. I have to write a reference. What do I need to consider?

9. Can I see a reference that has been written about me?

10. I have to transfer a batch of student records to a third party. How should I do this?

11. I've been told I need to encrypt personal/ confidential data I am sending out of the University. How do I do this?

12. I want to set up a social networking site for students on my course.  What do I need to think about before I do this?

13. I'm the personal tutor for a student with a disability. As I'd like to help support their academic studies what information can I pass on to others in my School?

14. I've moved offices and don't have enough space for all my records. Can I put them out for the cleaners in a black bin bag?

15. I work from home. What do I need to consider?

16. I’ve had an email from a student asking me to give them copies of the information the University holds about them. What should I do?
 
17. I’ve been asked to delete electronic records containing personal data. What should I consider?
 
18. I would like to delete personal data I’ve stored on my home computer and/or on a PDA/DVD/CD. How should I do this?
 
19. I want to use a cloud computing service for personal data. What do I need to know?
 
20. I have received a Court Order. What do I do with it?
 
 
1. Can I share personal data within the University?
Where there is a strictly need to know reason for disclosing personal data about a student or staff member and there is a reasonable expectation by that individual that their data may be disclosed, then an appropriate sharing of data is permitted. However, you must then consider the method by which you do this and to whom you disclose the data. Any emails should be marked as confidential to alert the recipient and discourage any inappropriate forwarding or copying in to a response.
 
Where the data is considered to be sensitive e.g. it concerns physical or mental health or a disability, then the written consent of the individual is required before any such data can be shared. Further information on data sharing is available in Sections 8.1 and 8.2 of the Code of Practice
 

2. I've received a request from a parent. What can I tell them?
Whilst we may have every sympathy with the parent who may be funding their son or daughter's education and consider that they are sponsoring their education, we are unable to disclose any personal data about their son or daughter without the individual's consent, which should be in writing. This applies to all enquiries about University students irrespective of whether they are under the age of 18.

However, this does not mean that you are unable to respond at all to the parent e.g. with details of our policies and procedures, term dates or how a student may make a complaint. In certain cases it may be acceptable to take a message and pass this on if subsequent checks confirm that the individual is a student at the University. But in doing so you must be careful not to disclose to the enquirer whether or not the individual is a student.
 

3. I've received a request for student data from a sponsor. What do I do?
Some of our students have a formal financial sponsorship arrangement with a company, prospective employer or their home country's Embassy, who may then request details of their sponsored student's attendance and academic progress. You should check with Finance whether there is a formal sponsorship agreement in place for the student. If you're in any doubt then you should contact the student direct and ask them to confirm this and seek their consent to disclose their data.
 
Once you have done your checks or received consent, you should only provide basic limited information about a student's academic progress and attendance; anything else will be regarded as excessive.
If attendance has been interrupted or affected e.g. due to ill health, since this is sensitive personal data we must have the written consent of the student to disclose this and the reasons for the absence to their sponsor.
Further information and guidance on disclosures and the appropriate secure method of doing this are in sections 8.5 and 8.6 of the Code of Practice.
Image of question mark on keyboard
 
 
 
4. A police officer is asking me for data about a student. What should I do?
Under the Data Protection Act 2018, we are permitted but not required to provide personal data to a police officer, or any other officer who is pursuing an investigation for the purposes of criminal or civil proceedings. There is a prescribed University procedure for the handling of any such requests and no disclosures should be made before referring the enquiry to Governance Services, where they will be considered and responded to as appropriate. Further information is given in sections 8.5 and 8.6 of the Code of Practice. 

 
5. I've been asked by an employer to verify a student's award. Can I do that?
The University will often be contacted by employment agencies, prospective employers and other third parties to verify details about a student or to ask if a member of staff is employed at the University. Such requests for information should be treated as a request under the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 and the University will need to consider whether an exemption applies where it relates to personal data. Full guidance on what to do is in section 8.10 of the Code of Practice.
 
Where a student or member of staff claims that they have attained an award and this is proved to be false you should consult the guidance in section 8.11 of the Code of Practice.
 
 
6. ENSA / ENSA Advice have phoned me and asked me to confirm some student data. Can I do this?
The University works closely with Edinburgh Napier Students' Association (ENSA) and ENSA Advice for the benefit of students but staff must remember that ENSA and ENSA Advice are independent of the University. This means that before we disclose any data to them we must be satisfied that the student has given their consent for us to do so. Whilst we would not want to create or add to any academic or pastoral difficulties a student may be experiencing, if you are in any doubt then ask to see a copy of the student's disclosure form or contact the student to seek their consent and/or send them the requested data, which they can then forward as appropriate.
 

7. How do I find out what personal data the University holds about me?
Under Data Protection Legislation, you have a right of access to your personal data. The University has a prescribed procedure for this, information on which is in the guidance on Accessing Personal Information. However, if you would like to see only one or two documents which you believe contain your personal data then you should contact the Information Governance Manager to discuss this.

 
8. I have to write a reference. What do I need to consider?
University staff are routinely asked to provide internal and external references for students and other staff. There are important legal and other considerations to note in doing so and the Guidance Note on References should be consulted before any reference is provided on behalf of the University.
 

9. Can I see a reference that has been written about me?
This will depend on who wrote the reference. If a member of University staff has written a reference about you then this is generally exempt from your right of access under Data Protection legislation. However, if a third party has written a reference which has been received by the University then this is not exempt, but consideration must be given to the data privacy rights of the referee. Further guidance on this is in section 19 of the Code of Practice. 

 
10. I have to transfer a batch of student records to a third party. How should I do this?
Before you send any personal data out of the University whether electronically or in hard copy, you must ensure that you have the relevant University authority to do this i.e. permission from your line manager or you are satisfied that the transfer is in pursuance of an agreement or is required by law. You must then ensure that the data is transferred as securely as possible having considered the level of sensitivity and volume of the data to be sent. You must not:
Assume that documents transferred by electronic means e.g. email, web transfers, File Transfer Protocol are secure
Send any material containing sensitive personal data, or data that if it should be lost is likely to cause damage or distress to the subjects unless it has been encrypted
Download personal data onto physical devices e.g. USB memory sticks, CDs or DVDs unless absolutely necessary; you must then ensure such devices are appropriately encrypted
Send hardcopy data in the mail unless it's marked strictly private and confidential, is addressed to a named individual and sent recorded delivery
 
More guidance is in section 7.5 of the Code of Practice.
 

11. I've been told I need to encrypt personal/ confidential data I am sending out of the University. How do I do this?
Information Services publish guidance on the encryption of confidential or sensitive data and on email encryption. 

 
12. I want to set up a social networking site for students on my course.  What do I need to think about before I do this?
You should check first with Information Services whether this can be hosted internally. If for good reason you decide that what they can offer does not meet your requirements then you need to be aware that there are significant data protection and legal issues which will be relevant if you go to an external service provider. Consult the guidance on Web 2.0 services for further information and in particular the Guidance for Staff.
 
 
13. I'm the personal tutor for a student with a disability. As I'd like to help support their academic studies what information can I pass on to others in my School?
As physical or mental health matters and conditions are sensitive personal data, you must take extra care in the handling of any information which relates to such matters. Normally, you must not disclose any information to any other individuals without the express written consent of the subject, even where this may adversely affect their studies. Further guidance is in section 12 of the Code of Practice.
 
 
14. I've moved offices and don't have enough space for all my records. Can I put them out for the cleaners in a black bin bag?
Under the Data Protection legislation, you should only keep records which contain personal data "for as long as is necessary". How long you should keep such data will depend on what it is and whether there are statutory or professional requirements or best practice considerations for retaining it. The University is developing records retention schedules which you should consult before you dispose of any records. If there isn't a schedule for your area then you should consult section 20 of the Code of Practice or contact Governance Services. 
 
Once you've decided that you can dispose of records which contain personal or confidential data you must ensure this is done securely by placing them in a console bin provided by the University's contractors for the disposal of confidential waste or failing that, by shredding the records. You must not put these records in either the normal waste disposal or recycling bins. Further guidance is available in section 7.9 of the Code of Practice.
 

15. I work from home. What do I need to consider?
All University staff who work from home, either on an occasional or a regular basis, must be aware of their obligations under Data Protection legislation, the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 and the University's Information Security Policies. Security of personal data is paramount when any personal data is accessed remotely or physically removed from University premises and must be ensured whether you are doing administrative, research, academic or other teaching-related work.  Key points are:
If you have to take manual or electronic personal data home, you must ensure you use all appropriate security precautions to guard against inappropriate or unauthorised access
If you download personal information to a removable device e.g. USB stick, CD, DVD or to a University laptop you must encrypt the device or laptop
Don't leave personal information unattended at home, in cars or briefcases, locked or unlocked
You are strongly advised to set up a virtual private network (VPN). You must also keep back-ups of information and consider the most secure way to do this
You must return all personal data to the University for secure disposal
 
Section 7.8 of the Code of Practice gives guidance and further links on what you should do to ensure there are no security breaches.
 
Note that the University can be fined up to €20million for serious breaches of data security.
 
IT publish guidance on Remote Access to the Network which explains how to install and use a virtual private network.

Human Resources' Homeworking Policy, available from the  HR Documents intranet page, addresses the relevant issues in section 9 and Appendix 4.
 
Image of Question Mark made of post-it notes
16. I’ve had an email from a student asking me to give them copies of the information the University holds about them. What should I do?
Where an individual is seeking their personal data, this is called making a subject access request and must be dealt with under Data Protection legislation. You should respond by sending the student a link to the University’s guidance on Access to Personal Information which includes a form and information about the process, verification of identity which may be required and the timescale of one month for our response. The form is intended to assist the individual and the University in specifying the information being sought and where it may be held, but completion of the form is not compulsory as long as the request has been made in writing and identity has been verified where necessary. If the student is looking for one or two specific documents rather than everything the University holds about them, then you should discuss this with your line manager or the Information Governance Manager before invoking the formal process.
 
If they (or any third party) are looking for information about someone else this should be treated as a request under the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 and submitted to foi@napier.ac.uk
 
 
17.  I’ve been asked to delete electronic records containing personal data. What should I consider?
Data Protection legislation does not define ‘delete’ or ‘deletion’ but a plain English interpretation implies ‘destruction’. As with manual data the University holds, it’s important to ensure that electronic data is securely disposed of at the appropriate time to comply with the data protection principle that states that personal data shall not be kept for longer than is necessary. You should consult your area’s records retention schedule (if one has been developed) to check whether the data is due to be deleted and if so whether this is to be done permanently or is to be preserved as archival information. If your area does not have a schedule in place you should consult s.20 of the Data Protection Code of Practice or contact the Governance Adviser (Records Management).
 
The UK Information Commissioner oversees compliance with Data Protection legislation and has published Guidance for organisations on Deleting Personal Data.
 
You should be aware that the contents of an email or email folder are not to be regarded as deleted merely because you have moved it/them to your ‘Deleted Items’ folder. You should ensure you delete relevant records permanently from this folder and similarly, you should empty your desktop ‘Recycle Bin’ for other electronic records which you’ve deleted.
 
 
18. I would like to delete personal data I’ve stored on my home computer and/or on a PDA/DVD/CD. How should I do this?
The UK Information Commissioner, who oversees compliance with Data Protection legislation, has issued guidance for individuals on Deleting your data from computers, laptops and other devices.
 
 
19. I want to use a cloud computing service for personal data. What do I need to know?
Cloud computing services provide data processing and storage facilities which are external to the University. Some of these services may be hosted overseas in countries which do not have the same privacy protections required by the GDPR and DPA 2018. Staff must be aware therefore that breaches of Data Protection legislation could arise from using these services, unless there is a robust data sharing agreement in place.
 
The University already publishes comprehensive guidance on the use of Cloud Computing Services which must be consulted and also this guidance on Using Cloud Computing Services for events management or advising students about advertised Cloud Services.
 
 
20. I have received a Court Order. What do I do with it?
The University receives a number of court orders in the course of a year, many of which are for the production of documents the University may hold within 7 days of the order being served. The purpose of this guidance is to highlight the key points which all University staff must be aware of in ensuring a Court Order is dealt with timeously and correctly.

University Information Governance Group
 

The purpose of the University Information Governance Group (UIGG) is to ensure that the University Computer keyboardmaintains compliance with its statutory obligations under the GDPR, the Data Protection Act 2018, Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002, Environmental Information (Scotland) Regulations 2004, and Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC Directive) Regulations 2003 and any other related information management legislation, and develops related best practice guidance.

 

Remit
Download the remit of the University Information Governance Group.

 

Minutes
Open minutes of the UIGG will be made available following each meeting and can be accessed here.

 

Information Governance Champions 
 

The purpose of the Information Governance Champions network  is to identify and promote good information governance practice and to help ensure the University's compliance with information governance legislation.

 

Find your Information Governance Champion
Please click here​ for the current list of IG Champions.​



We need representatives from each School/Service Area, to nominate a champion in your area please email dataprotection@napier.ac.uk or contact Governance Services for more information.



Remit
Download the remit of the Information Governance Champions.

 

​International Transfers of Personal Data
 

A passport to IndiaFurther guidance on international transfers of personal data is available in Section 11 of the Data Protection Code of Practice.

 

Checklist and Exceptions to Prohibition for Transfers to Non-EEA Countries
University staff should ensure that there are clear and documented procedures and administrative responsibilities for the transfer of personal data to non-EEA countries. In addition, Data Protection Legislation provides a number of exceptions to the prohibition on the transfer of the personal data in question.  The factors which University staff should consider if a transfer of personal data is proposed are in this checklist.

 

  Download the Checklist and Guidance on exceptions for transfers to Non-EEA countries

 

EU-US Privacy Shield (Safe Harbour replacement)
The EU-US Privacy Shield became fully operational from 1 August 2016. Companies can sign up to the Privacy Shield with the U.S. Department of Commerce who will then verify that their privacy policies comply with the high data protection standards required by the Privacy Shield.

 

Important information about the transfer of personal data to the United States
From 1 August 2016 the US Safe Harbour Scheme was replaced by the EU-US Privacy Shield. Information about the scheme can be found on the ICO's website and the European Commission's website, which gives the following overview:

 

"What is the Privacy Shield?

The Privacy Shield allows personal data to be transferred from the EU to a company in the United States, provided that the company there processes (e.g. uses, stores and further transfers) your personal data according to a strong set of data protection rules and safeguards. The protection given to your data applies regardless of whether you are an EU citizen or not.  

 

How does the Privacy Shield work?

To transfer personal data from the EU to the U.S. different tools are available such as contractual clauses, binding corporate rules and the Privacy Shield. If the Privacy Shield is used, U.S. companies must first sign up to this framework with the U.S. Department of Commerce. The obligation applying to companies under the Privacy Shield are contained in the "Privacy Principles". This Department is responsible for managing and administering the Privacy Shield and ensuring that companies live up to their commitments. In order to be able to certify, companies must have a privacy policy in line with the Privacy Principles. They must renew their "membership" to the Privacy Shield on an annual basis. If they do not, they can no longer receive and use personal data from the EU under that framework.

 

If you want to know if a company in the U.S. is part of the Privacy Shield you can check the Privacy Shield List on the website of the Department of Commerce (https://www.privacyshield.gov/welcome). This list will give you details of all the companies taking part in the Privacy Shield, the kind of personal data they use, and the kind of services they offer. You can also find a list of the companies that are no longer part of the Privacy Shield."

The following links provide current guidance:

European Commission news article 01/08/2016

European Commission Press Release 12/07/2016

FAQs

Any staff who have concerns about current agreements or are contemplating future ones should contact Governance Services.

​​Internet, Online, AI/Large Language Models (LLMs) and Web 2.0 Services
 

Further guidance on the data protection issues relating to the internet, online and Web 2.0 services is available in

Section 9 of the Data Protection Code of Practice.

 
​Interim Guidance for Staff on the Responsible Use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) Large Language Models (LLMs) to Protect Personal and Corporate Information (e.g. Bing Chat Enterprise1, ChatGPT, GPT-4, Bard, etc.)
​

Background 
Generative and publicly available AI models are creating excellent opportunities to enhance education and research, and opportunities to improve service delivery, effectiveness and efficiency.  These also bring challenges in terms of ethics, bias, academic integrity, privacy and the protection of corporate information. 
The following is presented as initial guidance to help ensure colleagues use this technology responsibly and mitigate the risks of disclosing personal data or business-sensitive information while using AI models, ensuring we preserve the integrity and confidentiality of our corporate information and meet our legal obligations under the UK GDPR and the Data Protection Act 2018.

Scope
This guidance applies to all employees and contractors who process University information.  It will continue to be reviewed and updated as the University’s overarching policy and strategy for the use of AI across its activities is developed. 

Key Points
Do not input personal data into an AI model.
Do not input the University’s corporate information (i.e. proprietary or confidential information which is not publicly available) into an AI model. 
​​Do not use AI models to make decisions about individuals.  Under the UK GDPR individuals have the right not to be subject to a decision based solely on automatic processing.
​
​Recommended Practices
Interacting with an AI Large Language Model typically requires the submission of text, which may be a question or statement, which is then used by the model to generate text or other media output. Data in prompts submitted to models for processing may be stored and used for other purposes, including the training of AI models, by the organisations hosting the LLMs. It is therefore vital to craft prompts carefully by providing sufficient context to enable the model to generate a helpful response without disclosing personal or corporate information. 

Here are some guidelines to bear in mind while constructing prompts:​

Anonymise information: Ensure that data within prompts is anonymised. In other words, do not use any direct identifiers or details which could indirectly identify individuals within prompts. An indirect identifier is information which could identify an individual if combined with other information reasonably available to the processor of the data, including information obtainable from other sources (e.g. published online, or from another organisation). 
​
Generalise prompts: Frame prompts in a general way, where possible, without specifying particular details. If, for example, you are looking for inspiration relating to a strategy for “Edinburgh Napier University”, you could ask for strategies which might be useful for a “UK Higher Education Institution”. As with hypothetical scenarios, this reduces the risk of disclosing identifiable or otherwise sensitive information.
​
Keep prompts hypothetical: Rather than submitting genuine scenarios, where possible use hypothetical scenarios with the same or a similar context. For example, if as a lecturer you were using an LLM to assist with writing a business proposal to develop a specialised new micro credential course, you could avoid mentioning the name of the university, the title of the proposed course, and the target market. Additionally, instead of submitting something like “I am developing a course along the following lines…”, consider how the issues you are interested in can be explored more obliquely. For example, you could try something like “If a course with features X were to be developed at a UK University, targeting a market with features Y…”, taking care not to over-specify X or Y. Drafting your question separately, before pasting into a chat interface, may help, and you may also find it helpful to consult with colleagues before submitting the prompt. With a careful approach like this you may receive excellent LLM output, applicable to the real-world scenario in question, without divulging potentially identifying or otherwise sensitive information. 
​
​Contextualise with care: The conversational nature of services like ChatGPT and Google Bard means that contextual information held by hosting organisations, and thus potentially available for other uses like training AI models, may “snowball” over the course of one or more chats. This can increase the risk of disclosing indirect identifiers, even if direct identifiers are avoided, and can also increase the risk of disclosing sensitive corporate information. Keep track of what has been provided to an AI model, taking this into account before submitting new prompts. 
​
Limit prompt detail: As a general rule, limit the detail within prompts submitted to an LLM. As with contextual information, please take care not to over-specify what is requested from the model as this may inadvertently disclose personal or otherwise sensitive data.
​
Do not use the technology to make decisions about individuals: Article 22 of the UK GDPR states that a “data subject shall have the right not to be subject to a decision based solely on automated processing, including profiling, which produces legal effects concerning him or her or similarly significantly affects him or her”. Colleagues should also avoid using the technology to contribute to decisions about individuals unless a Privacy Impact Assessment has been completed and there is a robust process in place approved by the appropriate Dean/Director.
​
Verify outputs: However plausible any LLM outputs are, always question their accuracy and truthfulness. Check this output independently and ensure that you are able to defend the veracity of any information relied on with reference to more authoritative sources.  

​1 Microsoft has implemented security features that make Bing Chat Enterprise a relatively lower risk option than some other web-based services (e.g. there is no chat history, and neither prompts nor responses will be used to train models).

​​A PDF version of this guidance is available here: AI Guidance on Protection of Personal and Corporate Information.pdf​​
​

Web 2.0 and Externally Hosted Services Guidance for Staff
Web 2.0 Services such as wikis, blogs and social networking sites provide staff and students with valuable educational opportunities to create and sha​re content and work online together. However, staff must be aware of the important legal and other implications that arise if they plan to use Web 2.0 services as part of module activities and communicate these effectively Image of computer and userto students and other users. This guidance aims to assist staff in making the most of Web 2.0 Services and other externally hosted services for learning, teaching and assessment purposes.

 

Download Web 2.0 Services and Other Externally Hosted Services - Guidance for Staff in Learning and Teaching​  
 
  

Web 2.0 Guidance for Students
This guidance is intended to make students aware of the relevant legal issues involved with the internet, Web 2.0 and other externally hosted services (e.g. Facebook, Twitter) and to encourage students to use these services in a safe, responsible and acceptable manner. It also offers guidance on how to protect themselves from electronic abuse or harassment by fellow students or others.

 

 Download Internet, Web 2.0 and Externally Hosted Services - Guidance for Students: How to be Webwise.

Oaths of Confidentiality
  

If you receive an error message when opening the PDFs below, please switch to another browser. Currently, Chrome seems to be having issues opening these PDFs, but Internet Explorer/Microsoft Edge is fine.



Oath of Confidentiality for Associate Staff, Temporary Staff and Employed Students
On joining Edinburgh Napier University, all Associate Staff, temporary staff (including and students who are employed) must be directed to the University's Data Protection Policy on the Governance intranet pages, be advised about relevant advice and guidance in the University’s Code of Practice, and sign an oath of confidentiality in relation to personal data and commercially sensitive or confidential data to which they will have access in the course of their work. This form should be retained by the supervising, employing or sponsoring area for a period of 6 years from the date on which the association or temporary employment ceases.

 

Download the Oath of Confidentiality for Associate Staff, Temporary Staff and Employed Students

 

 

Oath of Confidentiality for Contractors
Staff responsible for securing the services of contractors are required to ensure that contractors are given a copy of the University's data protection leaflet, be advised about relevant advice and guidance in the University’s Code of Practice, and sign an oath of confidentiality in relation to personal data to which they will have access in the course of their work.  This form should be retained by the area instructing the services for a period of 6 years from the date on which the agreement is concluded.

 

Download the Oath of Confidentiality for Contractors

 

 

Oath of Confidentiality for Staff or Students with Access to SITS
Where students, or staff who are also students, process personal data for the University's purposes, the relevant staff must ensure that: written authority from the relevant Head of School or Service has been sought before a current, employed student is given access to the Student Record System; they have been advised about relevant advice and guidance in the University’s Code of Practice; and that this oath of confidentiality has been signed.

 

Download the Oath of Confidentiality for Staff or Students with Access to SITS

 

 

Oath of Confidentiality for Research Students
All students conducting research at Edinburgh Napier University which involves processing personal data must be given a copy of the University's data protection leaflet, be advised about relevant advice and guidance in the University’s Code of Practice, and sign an oath of confidentiality in relation to personal data to which they will have access in the course of their studies.  This form should be retained by the area in which the research is being conducted for the period end of studies with the University plus 6 years.

 

Download the Oath of Confidentiality Form for Research Students

 

 

Oaths of Confidentiality for Unpaid Student Worker/ School Pupil Placement
On joining Edinburgh Napier University, all unpaid workers or school pupils on placement must be given a copy of the University's data protection leaflet, be advised about relevant advice and guidance in the University’s Code of Practice, and sign the relevant oath of confidentiality in relation to personal data to which they will have access in the course of their work.  This form should be retained by the placement area for a period of 6 years from the date on which the placement ceases.

 

Download the Oath of Confidentiality form for an Unpaid Student Worker

Download the Oath of Confidentiality for a School Pupil Placement

 

System User Access Form
Prior to giving colleagues access to systems which process personal data Systems Administrators must request that they complete a System User Access Form. This generic form can be tailored to the system specific requirements.

                                                                                                                       Page last updated 29 March 2019​​​


Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC Directive) Regulations 2003 (PECR 2003)
The Privacy and Electronic Communications Regulations were originally introduced in 2003 to regulate direct marketing activities by electronic means (by telephone, fax, email or other electronic methods). They also regulate the security and confidentiality of such communications, with rules governing the use of cookies and 'spyware'. The Regulations complement Data Protection Legislation in the regulation of organisations' use of personal data and in ensuring appropriate safeguards for individuals' rights and privacy. The Regulations apply different rules to individual subscribers and corporate subscribers, although some rules apply to both. Where personal data is used Data Protection legislation always applies and the Regulations cannot be used to avoid the requirements of Data Protection legislation.

 

The European Directive on which the Regulations are based was revised in 2011. As a result the existing Regulations in the UK were amended by the Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC Directive) (Amendment) Regulations 2011. The most recent changes were made in January 2019.

 

Many of the 2003 Regulations have stayed the same, but some important changes were made, which included:

rules for websites using cookies and similar technologies (see section 9 of the Code of Practice);
new powers for the UK Information Commissioner (ICO) to serve a monetary penalty on an organisation when very serious breaches of the Regulations occur; and
new powers for the ICO to investigate breaches of the Regulations by obtaining information from certain third party organisations.
 

Most of the rules on marketing by live phone call, automated phone call, fax, email and text message stayed the same.

 

'Direct marketing' means 'the communication (by whatever means) of any advertising or marketing material which is directed to particular individuals' (s.122 of the DPA 2018). The ICO considers "'direct marketing' as covering a wide range of activities which will apply not just to the offer for sale of goods or services, but also to the promotion of an organisation's aims and ideals." - this covers all advertising or promotional material, including that promoting the aims or ideals of not-for-profit organisations – for example, it covers a charity campaigning for support or funds. If your communication is designed to change behaviour then it is likely to be considered as marketing or promotional material.

 

Where the University wishes to communicate via electronic means with individuals, such as prospective students (e.g.
marketing the University) or alumni (e.g. fundraising) they must comply with the following rules in order to use these media for marketing communications to individual subscribers:

live voice telephone calls: the University must honour individuals' "Do not Call" requests, you must not make unsolicited live calls to:anyone who has told you they don’t want your calls; or any number registered with the TPS or CTPS, unless the person has specifically consented to your call
e-mail/SMS: You must not send marketing emails or texts to individuals without specific consent. There is a limited exception for your own previous customers, often called the ‘soft opt-in’. You can send marketing emails or texts to companies. However, it is good practice to keep a ‘do not email or text’ list of any companies that object.
The University must have the opt-in consent of subscribers OR meet the soft-opt-in test: he University must have the opt-in consent of subscribers OR meet the soft-opt-in test:
Contact details are obtained during negotiation or sale of goods or services to the recipient AND
marketing is conducted by the same entity as previous dealings with the individual AND
marketing relates to "similar products and services" AND
an opt-out mechanism is provided at the point of data collection and is provided with each new communication.
automated calling systems: the University must have prior consent. You must not make an automated marketing call – that is, a call made by an automated dialling system that plays a recorded message – unless the person has specifically consented to receive this type of call from you. General consent for marketing, or even consent for live calls, is not enough – it must specifically cover automated calls
faxes: the University must have prior consent, you must not send marketing faxes to individuals or to any number listed on the Fax Preference Service (FPS), unless they have specifically consented to your faxes. You can send marketing faxes to companies that are not listed on the FPS.
 

The ICO has published this updated ‘plain language’ guidance on PECRs.

and this updated guide to Electronic and Telephone Marketing.

 

Enforcement of PECRs
The Privacy and Electronic Communications Regulations are enforced by the ICO, who may impose a civil monetary penalty of up to a maximum of £500K if a business is found to have committed a very serious breach of the Regulations. In other cases an Information Notice requesting further information or an Enforcement Notice will be issued and a fine may be imposed for breach of an Enforcement Notice.

 

3.5 The Electronic Commerce (EC Directive) Regulations 2002
The e-Commerce Regulations 2002 include a requirement that the recipient of an e-Commerce service, including direct marketing, must be provided, in a form and manner that is easily, directly and permanently accessible, with certain information including:

The name of the service provider i.e. the University 

The geographic address at which the service provider is established

The details of the service provider, including staff email address, which make it possible to contact him rapidly and communicate with him in a direct and effective manner

The purpose of this requirement is to ensure that individuals are able to effectively utilise their consumer protection and other rights, including those granted under Data Protection Legislation and PECR 2003 as amended in 2011, by providing them with the necessary information about whom to enforce those rights. The Regulations do not prescribe how the requirement to make information "easily, directly and permanently accessible" should be met.

It is important that colleagues sending communications covered by PECR retain a record of consent to receive communications and a record of requests to unsubscribe from the communications (to ensure individuals are not inadvertently sent communications after requesting that they stop).

                                                                                                                  Page last updated 7 October 2019


Privacy Impact Assessments
 

A Privacy Impact Assessment is a risk assessment which is conducted for any processing (manual or electronic) of personal data to identify where risks are present and put measures in place to mitigate those ri​sks, thereby reducing the risk of data breach/es happening.

 

Privacy Impact Assessments are required in the following circumstances:

1) New projects or proprosed processing (manual and/or electronic) which will result in a system which processes personal data

2) Reviews, changes or updates to any "systems" or procedures (manual or electronic) where personal data is being processed

3) Existing processes which haven't had a privacy impact assessment conducted

 

Any/all procedures (tasks/activities) or systems which process personal data should already have written instructions which include a privacy risk assessment or have been subject to a data protection audit. These must be regularly reviewed to ensure they are still operationally correct.

 

If in doubt please contact Governance Services at dataprotection@napier ac.uk 

 

To paraphrase Article 25: The nature, scope, context and purposes of the personal data processing, along with the risks of a data breach occuring must be considered prior to (ideally during system design), and during processing e.g. processes/systems already in place.

Article 35 sets out the detail of the requirements for a Privacy Impact Assessment.

 

Question mark made of post-it notes

Guidance on Privacy Impact Assessments
When University staff are considering adopting new administrative systems and other processes with possible privacy implications, or updating existing systems or processes, they are required (by law) to undertake a Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA) in the early stages of a project to identify any potential privacy issues and risks, and seek ways to avoid, minimise or at least improve privacy concerns.

 

When must you undertake a PIA?

- If starting a new project which will result in a system or process (manual or electronic or electronic) which processes personal data

- If making substantial changes to a system (manual or electronic or both) which processes personal data and there is no existing PIA for the process/system (if a PIA exists it can be updated rather than initiated)

 

examples where PIAs have been done include:

- Student Learning Profile process: Information about students who require adjustments to learning/teaching materials/delivery, exams, etc. is passed from the Student Wellbeing and Inclusion team to appropriate contacts within the Schools

- Panopto Lecture Capture software for recording lectures

- Graduate Apprenticeship data sharing with other organisations involved in the course provision

- Childcare and discretionary funding procedures

- External examiner appointment and procedures for marking and mark collection/dissemination

 

Guidance on privacy impact assessments, which includes advice on when a PIA should be carried out, who should be involved and what form the process might take, is available in Section 10 of the Data Protection Code of Practice.

 

For assistance and guidance on conducting a PIA and  for us to provide you with the appropriate template for your specific processing or project please contact the University's Information Governance team at dataprotection@napier.ac.uk
 

 

                                                                                                                    Page last reviewed 22 June 2021

​ ​​​​​​​​


Data Protection Privacy Notice & HESA Notices
  

Edinburgh Napier University is a data controller for the purposes of UK data protection legislation (“the legislation”), that is, the UK Data Protection Act 2018 (“DPA 2018”) and the General Data Protection Regulation: EU 2016-679 (“GDPR”) as amended by “EU Exit” Regulations 2019 and now known as the UK GDPR, and processes personal data strictly in line with the legislation and its notification to the UK Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) who regulate the legislation in the UK. The University is committed to compliance with the legislation and protecting all personal data it processes.



Below are the University's main overarching Privacy Notices, followed by links to the HESA notices and the University's layered Privacy Notices specific to certain processes. 



Please note that the University is transitioning to the use of the term "trusted contact/s" rather than "next-of-kin" or "emergency contact/s" which were used previously. If you see the terms "next-of-kin" or "emergency contact/s", please read these as "trusted contacts", while we update our guidance and privacy notices.


 

Image of a folder marked confidential

 Student Recruitment Privacy Notice
Download the Student Recruitment Privacy Notice​


 

Student Applicant Privacy Notice
Download the Applicant Privacy Notice

 
Student Privacy Notice
Download the Student Privacy Notice

 
Staff Privacy Notice
Download the Staff Privacy Notice

 
Court Member Privacy Notice
Court_Members_Privacy_Notice.pdfDownload the Court Members Privacy Notice

 
Alumni Privacy Notice
 The Privacy Notice for Alumni can be found online using the following link:Alumni Privacy Notice

 

Research Privacy Notice (Generic)
This privacy notice provides some general information about processing taking place for a wide variety of research projects. If you are a participant in a research project you will be provided with a specific privacy notice along with the participant information.

Download the Generic Research Privacy Notice​ 

  

Image of a clipboard and penHigher Education Statistics Agency (HESA) Data Protection Notices
The University is legally required to send some information to the Higher Education Statistics Agency (HESA). The links below explain how HESA will use the information.

 

View the HESA Student Collection Notice

 

View the HESA Staff Collection Notice

 

View the HESA Destinations of Leavers from HE (DLHE) Collection Notice (for leavers up to the end of 2016/17)

 

View the HESA Graduate Outcomes survey information (for leavers from 2017/18 onwards)

 

View the Edinburgh Napier University Graduate Outcomes Privacy Notice and information here: https://www.napier.ac.uk/alumni/graduate-outcomes​ 

 

Additional 'Layered' Privacy Notices
Associate Staff - HR Process
Cashless Catering EPOS 
Colleague Engagement Survey​​
Commercial Courses Professional Associates
Commercial Courses Recruitment
Commercial Courses​
Complaints
Counselling Service
COVID Reset Mentoring Scheme​
​Culture, Employment and Development in Academic Research Survey (CEDARS)​
Data Lab Scholarship
Data Subject Rights Request
Disability and Inclusion
Disability and Inclusion - Student Engagement Project
Edinburgh College Flexible Workforce Development Fund Courses
[EN]gage Membership
ENroute HEA Enrolment
ENroute HEA Membership
ENSA Student Representatives
ePay Online Payment System
Equate Scot​lan​d​​
Equate Scotland eCommunications
​Equate ​Scotland Event Registration and Attendance Data​
Equate Scotland Photography, Film/Video and Quotes​
Graduate Apprentice Programme
Graduation Survey
Graduations (in Edinburgh)
Graduations (Virtual)​
Graduations (Overseas)
Higher Education Achievement Report (HEAR) - Gradintelligence
Image Library
InPlace - Nursing Student Placements Administration System
International Programmes
IS_Unidesk_Customer_Thermometer_Survey.pdfIS Unidesk Customer Thermometer Survey​
Job Alerts
Joint Supervision Projects​
Junior Music Students
​Keep On Track​
LibCal
Library Membership - External Members
Library Membership - Staff and Students
Mentoring_Programme_(Employee)_MentorNet​
Millport Field Trips​
Occupational Health Referrals and Assessments​
Online Store Privacy Noti​ce​
PG Dip Midwifery & Masters of Midwifery (Shortened)​​
PG Teacher Education Programmes (Placements)
Poppulo_privacy_notice.pdfPoppulo
Postgraduate Taught Experience and Postgraduate Research Experience Surveys
Principal's Office External Communications
Procurement Request Process
​Project VISION Sensor Technology Privacy Notice​
QS Global Academic Survey
REF Data Collection
RIE NHS Assure Research Commissioning Services Events​
SAFA Privacy Notice​
School of Applied Sciences Students' Health Data
School of Health and Social Care - 'Near Me' Videoconferencing​
School of Health and Social Care - Student Practice Learning Evaluation
Scottish Modern Universities Northern Ireland Tour
Self-Defence Class Registration
Simulated Patient Volunteer Programme
Special Collections​
Staff Recruitment
Staff Recruitment Satisfaction Survey
Student Accommodation
Student Accommodation Applicants Criminal Convictions
Student Accommodation Guarantors 
Student Card Production and Distribution
Student Funding
Student Futures​
Student Global Mobility (Study or Traineeship)
Student Mobility Survey Privacy Notice​
Student Open Days
Student Recruitment Privacy Notice for College Board personal data
Student Wellbeing and Inclusion Survey
Student Work Placements
Summer Accommodation
Talent Attraction
Transport Research Institute Survey
Travel Risk Assessment
Upskilling Short Courses​
Web Filter
Wellbeing and Inclusion Department​
Widening Access Project Participation Full Privacy Notice
Widening Access Project Participation Under-18s Privacy Notice​​
Widening Participation Networking Group 
Winning Students​

Template Privacy Notice (for internal staff use)
Where 'layered' Privacy Notices are required in addition to the main Privacy ​Notices detailed above colleagues are requested to contact dataprotection@napier.ac.uk) for a template.


Guidance on References
Scorecards 

Further guidance on references is available in Section 19 of the Data Protection Code of Practice.


Guidance Note on References
Guidance on providing references is now given by HR - please see their intranet page here: Policy (napier.ac.uk)​

                                                                                                                     Page last updated 19/01/2022
Processing Data for Research Purposes

Further guidance on the use of personal data in research is available in Section 6 of the Data Protection Code of Practice.

Page Contents
​1) Data Protection: Researchers' Guidance and forms
2) Oath of Confidentiality for Research Students
3) Standard Descriptions of Categories of Personal Data
4) Data Protection Legal Bases v Research Ethics Consent
5) Processing Personal Data in the Public Domain
6) Using Social Media for Research
7) Using Others' Photos for Research
8) Basic Pseudonymisation Guidance
9) Providing Participants with a Secure Method of Sending Their Personal Data to the Researcher/s
10) Undergraduate and Taught Postgraduate Research / Dissertations
​11) Transcription
12) Briefing Sessions

Sports Science Researcher1) Data Protection: Researchers' Guidanc​e and forms


Respect for confidentiality is essential to maintain trust between the public and those engaged in research.  All researchers intending to use personal data must comply with the requirements of data protection legislation, the University's Data Protection Code of Practice and any associated guidance. This guidance covers the data protection issues researchers should take into account and the actions to take to be compliant.

 

Whilst the University provides a generic Privacy Notice for Research this does not take the place of the project specific Privacy Notice that must be provided to participants.

 

Please read the guidance and complete the Researcher's Checklist, Oath of Confidentiality (if you are not an employed researcher who has signed an employment contract e.g. research postgraduate) and Privacy Notice. The checklist and oath are required internally by the supervisor, PI and/or Ethics Committee. The Privacy Notice must be provided to participants along with their participant information.

Research and Data Protection guidance

Please complete the Researcher's Data Protection Compliance Checklist (Pre-PIA)​​ and send to dataprotection@napier.ac.uk. If you have any queries whilst you are completing it please re-read the guidance document above or contact dataprotection@napier.ac.uk.

We have also provided a template Privacy Notice for you to update and provide to your participants. The Information Governance team don't need to see or check this, but please think about how this reads to your participants and word it accordingly: 

​Research Privacy Notice template​

​​ 

Further guidance is available from JISC https://www.jisc.ac.uk/guides/rdm-toolkit​ 

The European Commission's guidance on Ethics and Data Protection is available here: http://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/data/ref/h2020/grants_manual/hi/ethics/h2020_hi_ethics-data-protection_en.pdf​

 

2) Oath of Confidentiality for Research Students
All students conducting research at Edinburgh Napier University which involves processing personal data must directed to these intranet pages (Data Protection for Research), and sign an oath of confidentiality in relation to personal data to which they will have access in the course of their studies.  This form should be retained by the area in which the research is being conducted for the period end of studies with the University plus 6 years.

 

Download the Oath of Confidentiality Form for Research Students

 

If PG Research students are processing any categories of personal data they are required to complete an Oath of Confidentiality. 



3) Standard Descriptions of Categories of Personal Data
The following is a list of standard descriptions of categories of personal data examples:

☐ Personal details, including any information that identiﬁes the data subject and their personal characteristics, including: name, address, contact details, age, date of birth, sex, and physical description.

☐ Personal details issued as an identifier by a public authority, including passport details, national insurance numbers, identity card numbers, driving licence details.

☐ Family, lifestyle and social circumstances, including any information relating to the family of the data subject and the data subject’s lifestyle and social circumstances, including current marriage and partnerships, marital history, details of family and other household members, habits, housing, travel details, leisure activities, and membership of charitable or voluntary organisations.

☐ Education and training details, including information which relates to the education and any professional training of the data subject, including academic records, qualiﬁcations, skills, training records, professional expertise, student and pupil records.

☐ Employment details, including information relating to the employment of the data subject, including employment and career history, recruitment and termination details, attendance records, health and safety records, performance appraisals, training records, and security records.

☐ Financial details, including information relating to the ﬁnancial affairs of the data subject, including income, salary, assets and investments, payments, creditworthiness, loans, beneﬁts, grants, insurance details, and pension information.

☐ Goods or services provided and related information, including details of the goods or services supplied, licences issued, and contracts.

etc.     

 

Special category (sensitive) personal data concerns, reveals or is about:

☐ racial or ethnic origin

☐ political opinions

☐ religious or philosophical beliefs

☐ trade union membership

☐ genetic data

☐ biometric data (if used to identify a natural person)

☐ health

☐ sex life or sexual orientation

☐ criminal convictions and offences

☐ none of the above

 

4) Data Protection Legal Bases v Research Ethics Consent


Data Protection legal bases are distinct from research ethics consent in that the University has the legal power by law (statutory order) to conduct research and can therefore process personal data without specifically asking for consent, however research consent is required to ensure that the research is conducted in an ethical way and participants understand and agree to what is being asked of them or, you could say it is the accepted mechanism to ensure that research is conducted in an ethical way which upholds the rights of the participants e.g. to make an informed decision.

 There are some useful articles online:

Preparation for the implementation of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR): understanding the current legal situation (ukri.org)

"Informed, voluntary and fair consent is the cornerstone of ethical research involving people. It is a mechanism, to ensure the rights of individual participants can be respected. It is through the consent process that research participants can understand what taking part in a specific study will mean for them, so they can make an informed choice and feel able to express their wishes." 

GDPR Brief: What is the difference between research ethics consent and data protection consent? (ga4gh.org)


5) Processing Personal Data in the Public Domain
Processing information available in the public domain depends on purposes, the processing being done and legal basis used, etc. The ICO has guidance here: https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-data-protection/guide-to-the-general-data-protection-regulation-gdpr/the-right-to-be-informed/what-common-issues-might-come-up-in-practice/#id3 . Social media sites also have their own requirements set out in their Ts & Cs which must be complied with. Of course, processing for research can take place, but researchers must give due consideration to the requirements of the legislation and rights of participants, which is done through the University’s governance and ethics processes. There’s no problem with processing personal data as long as due regard is taken for the legislation and appropriate safeguards are put in place to protect participants' rights, the security of the personal data e.g. encrypted at all times and data minimisation is observed throughout the project e,g, collect only what is needed and pseudonymise personal data as early as possible.​

Where you are recruiting participants using information which is publicly available, please advise them where you got their information from and your justification for using it for your project e.g. their connection to the topic, subject matter expert, etc.. Where personal data is collected from publicly available resources there is a higher risk of the individuals complaining about the use of their data, so please ensure that you don’t contact anyone who would consider the use of their data to be unreasonable and unfair.



6) Using Social Media for Research


LinkedIn 
If you are advertising your research on a LinkedIn 'message board' and providing links in there to participant information and the privacy notice, this is fine, as long as it complies with the rules for that group or channel (if in doubt contact the group/channel administrator to ask permission). It is advisable to use NoviSurvey to give potential participants a secure method of signing up to your study. You can use NoviSurvey as a means of providing participant information, the privacy notice, collecting consent, and, of course, disseminating your questionnaire/survey. Depending on the research project this could potentially all be done at the same time. Where it is not necessary to collect personal data you can use NoviSurvey in anonymous mode and collect consent via a 'tick box' without requesting name, contact details, etc. which would identify the participant.

LinkedIn doesn’t have any guidance specifically for research participant recruitment via their messaging service (only for their own research). If you message members you must make information about the research project (including privacy notice information) available elsewhere online and provide a link in your intro message so that they can review it before making their decision whether or not to participate. If they do not respond you should not follow up more than once.

You must ensure that you comply with the LinkedIn Policies, Terms and Conditions of use as well as Data Protection legislation. The following links refer:

-https://www.linkedin.com/legal/professional-community-policies (Conduct Policy), which says: Comply with the law: You must comply with all applicable laws, including, for example, privacy laws

- https://www.linkedin.com/help/linkedin/answer/61106/linkedin-messaging-overview?lang=en



7) Using Others' Photos for Research
 
1) Use of photos from social media sites. You need to determine if the social media site is a closed group (requires membership) e.g. LinkedIn or Facebook, or the information/photos published are publicly available e.g. Twitter. Either way, if using social media as a source then you will need to comply with the site provider’s terms and conditions of use. Where the social media site requires membership to view the images you will also need to check if there are group terms and conditions which are applicable - the smaller the group, the higher the expectation of privacy. Processing information available in the public domain depends on purposes, the processing being done and legal basis used, etc. The ICO has guidance here: https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-data-protection/guide-to-the-general-data-protection-regulation-gdpr/the-right-to-be-informed/what-common-issues-might-come-up-in-practice/#id3. Of course, processing for research can take place, but researchers must give due consideration to the requirements of the legislation and rights of participants, which is done through the University’s governance and ethics processes. There’s no problem with processing personal data as long as due regard is taken for the legislation and appropriate safeguards are put in place to protect participants' rights, the security of the personal data e.g. encrypted at all times and data minimisation is observed throughout the project e,g, collect only what is needed and pseudonymise personal data as early as possible.

2) The use of photos to generate information for the project e.g. as a discussion point not to be disseminated further and only available to the researcher and the participant/s, this is fine from a data protection perspective however, appropriate safeguards e.g. security, need to be observed and copyright requirements adhered to (see point 4). 

3) The use of photos in outputs would require permission from the owner of the image (for copyright purposes, please see below), and if individuals can be identified in the photo then you must be able to prove that you have provided them with your Privacy Notice or that doing so would involve disproportionate effort. If photos are taken at public events there is a reduced expectation of privacy for individuals attending those events, however you must check if event organisers have notices up around the event advising attendees that photography will/may take place and if they have stipulated that photography may take place in their privacy notice, so worth checking with the event organiser if this is the case. If you are organising the event then please ensure you have notices up and that you have advised attendees in your event sign-up form and privacy notice that photographs will be taken. It is advisable to include a 'check box' in the event sign-up form where the attendee agrees that they understand that photography will take place and that their photo may be taken and used. You MUST provide them with instructions on how to opt out of having their photo taken - it may be that you reserve seats which will not be included in any photography or ask them to specifically request this on the day, so that you can identify them in any images and discard those. Depending on your individual circumstances you could include photos in your marked dissertation / thesis and redact them from any published versions – this is the safest scenario, as it is possible for complaints to arise if an individual is recognised in circumstances which may have consequences for them e.g. attending an event when they should have been at work. If processing someone else’s personal data that isn’t a direct participant it’s always a good idea to think about how you’d feel if that was your personal data e.g. is it fair, would they expect it, etc. and then by doing the pre-PIA process you can ensure the processing complies with the legislation.

If you are using photos in your outputs which include personal data (recognisable individuals) then you MUST have their written agreement to do this and taking of photos and their uses must be detailed in both the Participant Information and the Privacy Notice. You can either rely on Article 6(1)(e) (please see your DPIA checklist form) or rely on Article 6(1)(a) consent. In order to evidence this you can take a photo of the individual holding the Privacy Notice with their signed agreement or consent form, and ensure that those records are kept securely with your research consent forms.

4) Copyright in photos – please see our Library Guide here for more information: Copyright for researchers - Copyright guidance - LibGuides at Edinburgh Napier University. RIE (Research & Innovation Office (napier.ac.uk)) has also provided the following advice in answer to the question

You will need permission to use photos or ascertain whether permission has already been given - sometimes this is attached to the image under a Creative Commons License. As this is 3rd party IP, there will normally be some sort of rights over the use of the image even if researchers are not reproducing the actual content, they need the photos to generate discussion and descriptors as they will then be creating their own dataset on the back of this for their research. The photo is the background IP and the output is the foreground IP. We may have no rights to disseminate the foreground unless we sought these right at the start. If no CC license is given, researchers will need to ascertain their own permissions. ​

 

8) Basic Pseudonymisation Guidance

Please see guidance document here: Basic_Pseudonymisation_Guidance


 
​​9) Providing Participants with a Secure Method of Sending Their Personal Data to the Researcher/s


Researchers have a responsibility to provide participants with a secure method of providing you with their personal data. One way of doing this is by using a survey tool. The University has several tools available including Novi Survey and MS Forms – further information about these is available here: https://my.napier.ac.uk/it-support/how-do-i/survey-software

When creating your survey you can divide it into sections/pages and use these pages in the following way:

Page 1 – Provide participants with information about your project (Participant Information Sheet)

Page 2 – Provide participants with a Privacy Notice (template available here: http://napierstaff.napier.ac.uk/services/governance-compliance/governance/DataProtection/Pages/statement.aspx)

Page 3 – Consent form

Page 4 – Collection of personal data e.g. name, contact details, and any other information required for you to confirm that they are suitable candidates in order for you to meet your research objectives (if this is necessary for your project)

Page 5 – Collection of research data via a questionnaire (if this is appropriate at this stage of the project)

Page 6 – Debrief information (if necessary)

You can then provide participants with a link to your survey in your project promotion communications and participants can provide the information directly to you securely and without having to provide it by email or via a third party (gate-keeper, etc.).​



It is likely that when you collect your research data you will also be collecting personal data, particularly if you are recording audiovisual interviews. Using University provided and approved systems to collect your research data ensures that the security checks have already been done by Information Services, although you still need to take resonable care that you are using the systems provided correctly. You need to consider security at all stages of processing personal data e.g. collection of participant information during recruitment, administration of the 'research instruments' (survey's interviews, etc. etc.), during any sharing of data with others or transfer of data between systems or parties, right through to destruction. The ICO (UK data protection regulator) requires personal data to be encrypted at all stages of processing.



10) Undergraduate and Taught Postgraduate Research / Dissertations
 

Please see: http://napierstaff.napier.ac.uk/services/governance-compliance/governance/DataProtection/Pages/StudentAdvice.aspx​​ 

This section is guidance for UG & TPG students who are not receiving a stipend from the University or engaged in a University sponsored or other third party funded research project.



Students processing personal data for the purposes of undertaking their studies do so for their own personal purposes e.g. as part of their degree course dissertation. The student makes their own decisions about what work they will do, how this will be done and presented in their final submission, and therefore works on behalf of themselves and not the University. Whilst supervisors can advise on good research practice and data protection issues, and make suggestions about how the research is conducted, the final decision lies with the student. The University only becomes the Data Controller once the work is submitted.



If you are emailing proposed participants or recruited participants you must NOT put a list of names in the "cc" field of the email - you must use "bcc", unless you have a specific reason that the participants need to see eachother's details.



When recruiting particpants you must think about what is fair and reasonable with regards to the use of their data e.g. would they expect to hear from you? It is good practice to let them know where you sourced their contact details from. Give them adequate information about what you are doing so that they are fully informed - this will reduce the risk of a complaint being made about your use of their information. It is always less risky to allow participants to 'self-select' rather than to target them from information gathered from sources other than directly from the person themselves. 'Self-select' means that you advertise your study/project and individuals make a decision to participate and provide their information voluntarily.



You must ensure all participant personal data is adequately secure e.g. encrupted at all stages of processing whether at rest or in transit. Do not use systems which are not reputable or do not provide adequate security.



It is recommended that you provide participants with information about what you need their personal data for (usually called a Privacy Notice), any third parties that you are sharing it with, your rationale for the length of time you will keep their personal data before destroying it and if you are tranferring it outside the UK (not recommended), along with your participant information outlining the purpose, aims and objectives of your research project. Further information is provided in the document linked below.



Remember to always treat others' personal data with the same respect that you would expect your own personal data to be treated with and not do anything with the personal data that they would not expect you to do. 


Practical guidance is available here: UG Dissertation & TPG Research Data Protection Advice​​



11) Transcription
​

Microsoft Teams and Word online can both record and transcribe for you, and Webex also has transcription facilities. MS Word online can both record and transcribe and you can also upload a recording for MS Word to transcribe. It is very easy to use - please see insrtuctions online here: https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/office/transcribe-your-recordings-7fc2efec-245e-45f0-b053-2a97531ecf57

It will:

1) Concurrently produce an audio file (mp3) and transcript.

2) Accept an uploaded mp3, perhaps created on Audacity or a hand-held recorder, and produce a transcript from it.

3) it will be saved to a personal space on the Napier network (on Sharepoint).

​This can be used imm​ediately by any researchers with a Napier identity.



Information Services are also investigating other options for Researchers using services like NVivo and Caption Ed.

​​

Currently the University has 2 contracted external services for transcriptions:

Trusty Transcriptionists, and 
1st Class Secretarial​
If you have made an audio visual recording, you must only provide the external transcription service with the audio file. To convert the MS Teams file to an mp3 audio file you will need to download a copy of the recording into an ENU network area/folder and convert it to mp3 format.


12) Briefing Sessions for Researchers
Every 6 weeks the Information Governance team run "Data Protection for Researchers" briefing sessions. These are arranged via RIE. Further information is available via the RIE sharepoint site here:

https://livenapierac.sharepoint.com/sites/Grp_RIO-ResearcherDevelopmentchannel/SitePages/Researcher-Development-Programme.aspx ​

And all events can be booked via Eventbrite - https://www.eventbrite.co.uk/organizations/events

Contact RIEevents@napier.ac.uk if you have any questions​






Page updated 14 Nov 2023

​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​


Rights and Access to Personal Information
 

Data Protection Legislation gives individuals certain rights over the use/processing of their personal data and a general right of access to their personal data. This is called making a Subject Access Request.

 

For further information about data subject rights please see our guide:

ENU GDPR Rights Guide

and

 Data Subject Rights Request Privacy Notice

 

Please note: We will not respond to any requests from third party SAR platforms (ICO guidance April 2019 refers)
​
Subject Access Request (SAR): For Personal Information
 

Please read these SAR Guidance Notes before you make your SAR. A request must be in writing, preferably on this

   Subject Access Request form​ and submitted with a copy/photo of the required identification documentation to:

 

Information Governance Manager

Governance & Compliance Services

6th Floor Sighthill Campus

Edinburgh

EH11 4BN

or emailed to dataprotection@napier.ac.uk

 

SAR Procedure​

 

Please note that we will not respond to requests from 3rd party online platforms/apps/websites as advised by the ICO Scotland Office.

 

Subject Access Request (SAR): For CCTV Images
 

Please read these Guidance Notes before you make your SAR. A request must be in writing, preferably on this

request form and submitted with the required documentation to:

 

Head, Campus Services

Room 6.B.24

Sighthill Campus

Edinburgh

EH11 4BN 

 

Request for the personal data of a deceased individual
 

We would only deal with requests of this type from the deceased individual's next of kin or their legal representative or Executor. If the request is from the deceased individual's next of kin they must provide proof of ID and proof that they are the next of kin. If the request is from the deceased individual's legal representative or Executor they must put their request in writing on headed paper with proof of their identity and a copy of the HMRC form confirming their status. Requests should be sent to:

 

Information Governance Manager

Governance & Compliance Services

6th Floor Sighthill Campus

Edinburgh

EH11 4BN

 

Request for rectification of personal data

 Under Article 16 Of the GDPR, EU Citizens have the right to have inaccurate personal data rectified by Data Controllers (in this case the University). This also includes the right to have incomplete personal data completed where relevant. Students and Staff Members have the ability to update their own personal data by using the portals provided by the University:

Students can use: https://evision.napier.ac.uk/si/sits.urd/run/siw_lgn 
Staff can use: https://hrconnect.napier.ac.uk/mthrprod_ess/ess/#/​ when logged in to the University network
​
If you are unable to make the updates yourself then please submit the form below to dataprotection@napier.ac.uk

Data Rectification Form​


 

Request for the erasure of personal data ("Right to be Forgotten")
 

Under Article 17 of the GDPR EU citizens have the right to request the erasure of their personal data. This is also known as the ‘right to be forgotten’. The right is not absolute and only applies in certain circumstances. The Information Commissioner’s (ICO) guidance refers: https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-data-protection/guide-to-the-general-data-protection-regulation-gdpr/individual-rights/right-to-erasure/

We ask you to complete the form below to enable us to find the relevant information in order to make a decision about erasure.

Erasure_Request_Form.docxErasure Request Form

 ​ 
Students/Graduates/Previous Students:
In relation to processing done by the University, this right does not apply as student personal data is processed under GDPR Article 6(1)(e): “processing is necessary for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority vested in the controller”, which is the Statutory Instrument 1993 Number 557 (S.76). GDPR Article 17(3)(b) refers.

If the course you studied is regulated there will also requirements under other legislation (e.g. health legislation for student nurses and midwives) for the University to keep certain records relating to students. We are also required to keep records to verify qualifications e.g. for crime and fraud purposes.

Therefore, whilst it is not possible to delete your personal data from the University’s records we can remove you from contact lists .g. the Alumni database, to stop youreceiving communications from the University.

For more information please see the University’s Privacy Notice/s (appropriate to yourself) – they detail the purposes, legal bases, etc. for processing.

Employees:​​​
The University processes your personal data under GDPR Article 6(1)(b): “processing is necessary for the performance of a contract”, etc. which refers to your employment contract. There is also no automatic right under the legislation to have your personal data deleted where this is the legal basis for processing, as the University is required to keep certain records as evidence of your employment.

Requests for deletion will be considered on a case by case basis, dependent on the circumstances, but ‘core’ information is required to be kept permanently, although there may be other information which can be deleted, if requested.

For more information please see the University’s Privacy Notice/s (appropriate to yourself) – they detail the purposes, legal bases, etc. for processing.

Communications:
Please note that where you ask us not to contact you we are required to keep a record of this to ensure that we adhere to your wishes and you are not re-added to our databases by another means and contacted again.                                                                                                             


 

 

 

                                                                                                                Page last updated 02 November 2020
Security of Personal Data
 

 

Further guidance on security of personal data is available in Section 7 of the Data Protection Code of Practice.

 Image of a safe
Security of Electronic Information Systems
For guidance on security of electronic information systems, please see the relevant details on the Information Services site.

 

Providing Coursework Marks to Students
It is much more secure to provide marks via Moodle than email. Instructions on how to do this can be found here. If you need more guidance please contact the Learning Technology Support Manager via: ISServiceDesk@napier.ac.uk

  
Manual & Physical Data Security Policy
In order to meet the requirements of Data Protection legislation, organisations are obliged to have in place a framework designed to ensure the security of all personal data.  The guidance note below sets out the University's policy on the security of manual and physical data.  Please note, this policy relates only to the retention and storage of non-electronically based personal data. All electronic data is covered separately by the University's Information Security Policy and its subsidiary policies.

 

Download the Manual and Physical Data Security Policy 


Security of Personal Information Checklist
This one-page checklist has been adapted from guidance issued by the UK Information Commissioner.

 

 Download the Security of Personal Information Checklist 

 

Password Protecting Documents
See below for guidance on how to password protect different document formats.

Password protect Word documents

Password protect Excel documents

Password protect PDF documents

 

Procedure for Breach of Data Security
 

It is important that action is taken as soon as possible following a data incident or breach to try to rectify the situation and mitigate any risks to data subjects. Tell your line manager, Governance Services or IS (as appropriate) - DON'T leave it...the sooner we know, the sooner we can do something about it!

 

Data Protection legislation governs the University's obligations with regard to personal data and these include a requirement to keep personal data secure. A breach of data security occurs where unauthorised or unintentional access to personal data is gained, whether this data is held in electronic or manual format. This procedure gives guidance on what to do in the event of such a breach occurring.

 

  Download the Procedure for a Breach of Data Security
 

If you send an email or email attachment in error the following are the steps you need to take to rectify it:

1) Re-open the email you've sent, click on 'Actions' on the toolbar at the top of the email, then select 'Recall this email'. Ensure the 'Delete unread copies of this email' (first option) and 'Tell me if recall succeeds or fails for each recipient' options are selected.

2) Copy the email from your sent items and paste it into a new email as an attachment and send this email to Unidesk@napier.ac.uk,  with a copy to dataprotection@napier.ac.uk,explaining what's happened and asking for the message to be deleted from the servers. The email should be titled "Data incident". It is important that a copy of the original email is provided as an attachment, not forwarded, as the attachment will contain metadata which will assist IS in finding it and removing it.

3) Complete the form at the end of the Procedure for Breach of Data Security and send this to dataprotection@napier.ac.uk

 

 Page last reviewed 26 August 2019


Social Networking & Online Forums
The UK Information Commissioner's Office (ICO) has published guidance on the application of Data Protection Legislation to the use of social networking for domestic and business purpImage of computer screenoses. There is a clear distinction between the two since use for domestic purposes i.e. personal data that is processed by an individual for the purposes of their personal, family or household affairs is exempt from the provisions of the legislation. 

Where however social networks and online forums are used for business purposes then that use is subject to the Data Protection Legislation in the normal way. When an organisation, or individual acting for non-domestic purposes, posts personal data on a social networking site, message board or blog, they will need to ensure that they have complied with Data Protection Legislation. The same applies if they download personal data from a social networking site and use it for non-domestic purposes.

The ICO's full guidance contains lots of practical examples which staff may find helpful in determining whether or not their online forum is being used for a domestic purpose and aims generally to help those using social networking in the course of their employment to understand their obligations and promote good practice.  Where staff are satisfied that they are using social networking for academic or business purposes then they can refer to this extract of the guidance for information.

 

Twitter - the legal perils and pitfalls
Twitter is increasingly used to engage with colleagues, students or customers in a quick and effective way but you should be aware of the legal line which may be crossed in using this social medium. This guide to the legal issues sets out what you need to know:   BBC Magazine article

 

 

Online Safety - what precautions can I take to keep my personal data secure online?
Organisations that collect and use individuals' information have responsibilities under Data Protection Legislation to protect it but how can you keep your personal data safe when conducting Image of a padlocked laptop PCyour personal affairs online?  The UK Information Commissioner comments that "more and more people are conducting their personal affairs online e.g. shopping, social networking, job hunting and the ability to carry out official functions, such as renewing car tax or contacting local councils and government departments online, are now an everyday part of life. Doing things online can offer convenience and widen opportunities and in general people value it.

However, you can take various precautions to protect yourself from identity fraud or the misuse of your information, or to ensure that your privacy is respected in the way you would want."

See the UK ICO's guide on weblink 'Online Safety' for more information.

 

Social Media Policy for Staff
Human Resources have developed a policy for all staff and third parties working for or on behalf of the University; including casual, agency and associate workers, who have access to the University’s electronic communication systems and equipment.  The policy is available here.

 

'Facing up to Facebook'
FE and HE institutions are increasingly using Facebook to engage with learners for educational purposes, e.g. a lecturer setting up a Facebook group with students. All staff must be aware that where institutional network systems are used there are a number of safeguards, procedures and support mechanisms which must be put in place to ensure safe, accessible and appropriate usage. This includes procedures to handle incidents of unacceptable Facebook usage, which could range from simple offensive behaviour to behaviour that is considered criminal in nature, such as racist abuse. JISC Legal have published a Guide for FE and HE institutions on the wide range of issues to be considered.

 

Use a Smartphone?
Here’s some  guidance from the UK Information Commissioner on keeping your device secure.

 

 

                                                                                                                   Page last reviewed 29 March 2019
Student AdviceImage of students in discussion

Further guidance on student advice is available in the Data Protection Code of Practice: Section 14.2 - Counselling Service for Students and Section 15 - Student Advice.


Counselling Services - Confidentiality & Data Protection
This leaflet provides guidance information on the confidentiality and data protection issues related to the Student Counselling Service.  For more information on the Counselling Service please see the Wellbeing and Support pages on MyNapier. 

 

  Download the Student Counselling Service Guidance on Confidentiality and Data Protection

 

 

Data Protection Factsheet for Students
This is an at-a-glance guide to some key Data Protection issues for every student, with 5 Things You Should Know and Top Tips from the UK Information Commissioner.

 

  Download the Data Protection Factsheet for Students

 

Personal Data Processed by Students
 

When students process personal data on University provided services for the purposes of maintaining their personal lives, e.g. communicating with family and friends, maintaining address lists, databases, pursuing their course of study with the University, including writing assignments, assessments, essays, reports, dissertations or theses, they do so for their personal purposes - the University is not the Data Controller for any data, personal or otherwise, as the student is not an employee or agent of the University and neither do they act on behalf of the University. Students are working on behalf of themselves, not the University.

 

Once the students' work is submitted to the University for assessment, the University becomes the Data Controller for that work, as provided.

 

Where students are working on a research project led by the University, where the University decides the remit of the project and therefore the purposes of processing, then the University is the Data Controller and all researchers on the project are required to comply with the requirements for research and researchers​.

 

                                                                                                                      Page last reviewed 29 March 2023
Data Protection Training
- the Data Protection Act 2018 and UK-GDPR (General Data Protection Regulation)
Training session
 

Do you deal with any personal data in the course of your work? If so, you need to know more about the General Data Protection Regulation and the Data Protection Act 2018 (collectively referred to as Data Protection legislation) and how it applies to your role at the University. The training is being provided to protect members of staff, the University and ultimately the individuals whose personal data we process. No-one wants to be involved in a personal data breach or information security incident!

Come to our next training session for a ‘whistle-stop’ tour of your rights and responsibilities as a member of staff.

This event provides an overview of the new Data Protection legislation and includes specific topics of interest to colleagues e.g. e-marketing, and new requirements for consent and privacy notices.

Facilitated by:
Diana Watt, Information Governance Manager
Duration: 1 hour, as part of the Information Governance Briefing sessions
Provider Details: Governance Services, dataprotection@napier.ac.uk, ext. 6257
 
Who should attend:
All new members of staff are expected to attend an initial Information Governance Briefing session as part of their induction. Online training must also be completed as part of induction and again annually as a refresher session - this is mandatory training for all University employees.

Main description:
As every member of staff processes personal data, all staff need to know about the University’s compliance obligations and ensure they are equipped to deal with those arising in their role/area.

This event will cover the following topics:
·        Expanded definition of personal data (data you didn’t consider to be ‘personal’ e.g. IP addresses, may now be included, which means you need to provide appropriate security and handling measures to it)
·        Requirements to demonstrate compliance and accountability
·        Privacy by design and security
·        Expanded data subject rights
·        New requirements for consent and expanded privacy notices
·        What to do when sharing data
·        Reviewing all contracts where data is shared and where data is processed outside the UK
·        How do we plan for implementation and what we can do now.
 
Current/topical issues will be included in these interactive sessions and there will be opportunities for Qs & As. Links to comprehensive advice and guidance and actions to follow up after a briefing session will also be provided. 

Session outcomes for participants are to:
• Be clear about their responsibilities under the new Regulation
• Recognise the practical data protection issues and risks in their area
• Know where to go for advice & guidance

Current Dates 
You can find details of upcoming sessions and book on via HR Connect http://staff.napier.ac.uk/learningevents/Pages/Default.aspx?SearchFilter=D 

 
Online Training
You can complete the online training module here or you can access it via:

All Programs > Apps Anywhere > Categories > Health and Safety > Essential Skillz

  
Departmental Briefing Sessions
Governance Services are also able to offer team briefing sessions where we can come along to a team meeting to brief colleagues and discuss issues in a team context. Please email us at dataprotection@napier.ac.uk if you would like to arrange one of these sessions for your team.

 

Other resources available:
The UK Information Commissioner's Office (ICO) has many resources available, including videos: https://www.youtube.com/user/icocomms

     
                                                                                                                   Page last reviewed 21 Feb 2022​


University’s Registration Number

The University is required to register with the UK Information Commissioner in order to process personal data.  The University’s Registration number is Z6797802. 

 

 


 
What are cookies?
Cookies are small text files that are, with your agreement, placed on your computer by the websites you visit. They can be used to improve website performance, remember your preferences and help us to promote our events and courses to you on other websites, based on what you’ve looked at.

There are four main categories of cookie:

First party cookies. These are set by the website you are visiting and can be used to see how users are using the site.
Third party cookies. These can be set by other websites not owned by the site you’re visiting.  These may be set by sites whose content is shown on our website, such as YouTube.  Edinburgh Napier has no control over third party cookies.
Session.  These are temporary cookies that are stored while browsing and deleted once a user closes their web browser.
Persistent.  These are data files stored in a web browser and are used to remember user preferences, settings and information for future visits.
Most web browsers allow some control of most cookies through the browser settings. To find out more about cookies, including how to see what cookies have been stored on your browser or hard drive and how to manage and delete them, visit All About Cookies.

Please be aware that if you if you use your browser settings to block all cookies (including essential cookies) you may not be able to access all or parts of certain websites.

How we use cookies
Edinburgh Napier University uses cookies to distinguish you from other users of our website by collecting standard internet log information, e.g. IP address, browser type and date and time the site was visited, and details of visitor behaviour patterns. Our internal website for staff also uses cookies.

We use the following types of cookies:

Essential cookies. These are cookies that are required for the operation of our website. They include cookies that enable you to log into secure areas of our website.
Analytical cookies. These cookies allow us to recognise and count the number of visitors to our website and to see how visitors move around our website when they are using it. This information helps us make better decisions about content and features on our website, aimed at improving the overall user experience.
Marketing cookies. These cookies allows us to track conversions on our marketing campaigns and enable us to deliver ads relevant to you on various social media and search channels like Facebook and Google.
Cookies used on our site
TikTok
We use the TikTok pixel to target our marketing campaigns, provide us with statistics to improve our marketing and provide TikTok users with information which is useful and appropriate to them based on their browsing activity, preferences and demographic information.

The TikTok pixel is a piece of JavaScript code that enables us to understand how many TikTok users have acted after seeing one of our adverts. It also allows us to tailor our marketing campaigns on TikTok to users who have previously shown interest in the University on our websites, or who click on our advertisements seen on the TikTok platform and display the most relevant advertisements to them on TikTok.

Collecting data allows TikTok to report on marketing activity and understand the demographic of TikTok users (“audience”) who are interested in the University and courses. TikTok will also serve our adverts on the TikTok platform to users who fit a certain demographic profile. 

The TikTok pixel will capture browser level information including:

Your IP address;  
Which of our websites you are landing on and how you are finding that site (if you are being ‘referred’ through a link from another website, email or Ad);  
Which web browser you are using (e.g. Safari, Firefox, Edge, etc.), device make, model and operating system; 
Ad/ Event information: Information about the advertisement a TikTok user has clicked or an event that was triggered; 
Timestamp: Time that the pixel event fired. This is used to determine when website actions took place, like when a page was viewed, when a product was purchased, etc.; 
View the full statement on how we use TikTok.

Snapchat
We use the Snapchat pixel to target our marketing campaigns, provide us with statistics to improve our marketing and provide Snapchat users with information which is useful and appropriate to them based on their browsing activity.

The Snapchat pixel is a piece of JavaScript code that enables us to track conversion, in essence telling us how many Snapchatters have taken action after seeing one of our Ads. It also allows us to tailor our marketing campaigns on Snapchat to users who have previously shown interest on our site, and display the most relevant Ads to them on Snapchat. 

Collecting data allows Snapchat to report on marketing activity and understand the demographic of Snapchatters ('audience') who are interested in our University and courses. The pixel will capture browser level information including:
Your IP address; 
Which of our websites you are landing on and how you are finding that site (if you are being ‘referred’ through a link from another website, email or ad); 
Which web browser you are using (for example Safari, Firefox or Edge);
This 'audience' information will be stored for 30 days by Snapchat then deleted.

When you visit our website we ask you to consent to receiving electronic marketing by agreeing to our Cookie Policy - you can choose to opt out at any time via Snapchat
If you have any queries about the use of your data by Snapchat please see their Privacy Notice and GDPR Compliance page.
You can view Snapchat’s cookie policy (please see the section on Analytics and Advertising Services).
Please note that although Snapchat are a US based company they are Privacy Shield registered to comply with EU data protection legislation.
Microsoft Ads (Bing)
We use Microsoft Universal Event Tracking (UET) to target our marketing campaigns, provide us with statistics to improve our marketing and provide Bing users with information which is useful and appropriate to them based on their browsing activity.

The UET is a piece of JavaScript code that enables us to track conversion, in essence telling us how many Bing users have taken action after seeing one of our Ads. It also allows us to tailor our marketing campaigns on Bing to users who have previously shown interest on our site, and display the most relevant Ads to them on Bing. 

Collecting data allows Microsoft Ads to report on marketing activity and understand the demographic of Bing (“audience”) who are interested in our University and courses. The data that Microsoft collect can be broken down into the below categories:
Web browsing and online searches: they use your search history and the history aggregated from other people to give you better search results.
Places you go: location information you provide, or that Microsoft detect using technologies such as GPS or IP addresses, help to give you directions to places you want to go and show you information relevant to where you are.
To show more interesting ads: they use data such as your location, Bing web searches, Microsoft or advertiser web pages that you view, demographics and things that you’ve added to your favourites to show you more interesting ads
When you visit our website we ask you to consent to receiving electronic marketing by agreeing to our Cookie Policy - you can choose to opt out at any time via Microsoft.

If you have any queries about the use of your data by Microsoft Ads please see their Privacy overview and Privacy Statement.
 
Please note that although Microsoft are a US based company they are Privacy Shield registered to comply with EU data protection legislation.
Facebook and Instagram (Meta)
We use the Facebook pixel to track conversions on our marketing campaigns.

The pixel is a small piece of code that allows Facebook to see what information is being viewed by users logged into their service. We can then use this information to provide relevant ads to users based on the content they were interested in.

Consent cannot automatically be revoked, but you can opt out on the Facebook site. View Facebook’s cookie policy.

We also use custom audiences based on personal information, such as email addresses, of prospective students, including applicants and enquirers. We do this to present you with information about studying at Edinburgh Napier University, and to identify people with similar interests who may also find it useful. For more information on how we manage personal data, please refer to the Privacy Policy.  

Blis
We use the Blis pixel to track conversions on our marketing campaigns from ads placed on their media platform.

The pixel is a small piece of code that allows Blis to see what information is being viewed by users of their service. They then use this information to provide relevant ads to users based on their behaviour.

Read more about Blis's commitment to privacy.

Quantcast
We use the Quantcast pixel to track conversions on our marketing campaigns.

The pixel is a small piece of code that allows Quantcast to see what information is being viewed by users logged into their service. They then use this information to provide relevant ads to users based on the content they are interested in.

Read more about Quantcast's privacy policy.

Google
We use Google products to see how our site is used and to target ads to those searching for products we offer.  View Google’s cookie policy. 

Google Analytics (GA)
We use Google Analytics to help us understand how visitors use our website. A cookie is set the first time a user visits our website and expires after two years. If you would like to prevent your data being used by Google, you can do so using a web browser add-on. Please see here for more information: Google Analytics Opt-out Browser Add-on Download Page. Google cookies include:

Name	Description	Duration
_ga	Used to distinguish users.	2 years
_gid	Used to distinguish users.	24 hours
_gat	Used to throttle request rate. If Google Analytics is deployed via Google Tag Manager, this cookie will be named _dc_gtm_<property-id>.</property-id>	1 minute
AMP_TOKEN	Contains a token that can be used to retrieve a Client ID from AMP Client ID service. Other possible values indicate opt-out, inflight request or an error retrieving a Client ID from AMP Client ID service.	30 seconds to 1 year
_gac_<property-id>	Contains campaign related information for the user. If you have linked your Google Analytics and Google Ads accounts, Google Ads website conversion tags will read this cookie unless you opt-out. Learn more.	90 days
_gac_<container-id>
Used to persist session state.	2 years
_gac_gb_<container-id>
Contains campaign related information. If you have linked your Google Analytics and Google Ads accounts, Google Ads website conversion tags will read this cookie unless you opt-out. Learn more.	90 days
Google Tag Manager (GTM)
We use Google Tag Manager to track specific on-page activities, such as clicks, course searches and enquiry form submissions.  Personal data from enquiry forms is stored securely in a Customer Relationship Manager (CRM) and not shared with any third parties as part of this tracking.

Google Ads
These ads appear at the top of Google search results (they’re the ones with “Ad” next to them) if you have searched for something we’re promoting (e.g. Clearing and Open Days).

We use cookies to track how many people click through to our site from these ads.  Again, no personally identifiable data is collected in this type of tracking.

Consent can’t automatically be revoked but you can opt out / change your ad settings on the Google site.

Google Display and Video 360 (DV360)

We use Google DV360 to place ads across a range of platforms. A pixel on our site allows the monitoring of which ads are generating visits to our site.

Hotjar
Hotjar allows us to see visually how people use our site through heatmaps and recordings.  It also allows us to see how many users follow predicted navigation routes (funnels) through our website and gives us a chance to ask them questions via short polls and surveys.  This information is then used to help us improve the overall user experience of our site.

You can opt out of this tracking on the Hotjar website. Hotjar uses the following cookies:

Name	Description	Duration
_hjClosedSurveyInvites	Hotjar cookie. This cookie is set once a visitor interacts with a Survey invitation modal popup. It is used to ensure that the same invite does not re-appear if it has already been shown.	365 days
_hjDonePolls	Hotjar cookie. This cookie is set once a visitor completes a poll using the Feedback Poll widget. It is used to ensure that the same poll does not re-appear if it has already been filled in.	365 days
_hjMinimizedPolls	Hotjar cookie. This cookie is set once a visitor minimizes a Feedback Poll widget. It is used to ensure that the widget stays minimizes when the visitor navigates through your site.	365 days
_hjDoneTestersWidgets	Hotjar cookie. This cookie is set once a visitor submits their information in the Recruit User Testers widget. It is used to ensure that the same form does not re-appear if it has already been filled in.	365 days
_hjMinimizedTestersWidgets	Hotjar cookie. This cookie is set once a visitor minimizes a Recruit User Testers widget. It is used to ensure that the widget stays minimizes when the visitor navigates through your site.	365 days
_hjIncludedInSample
Hotjar cookie. This session cookie is set to let Hotjar know whether that visitor is included in the sample which is used to generate funnels.	365 days
_hjShownFeedbackMessage
This cookie is set when a visitor minimizes or completes Incoming Feedback. This is done so that the Incoming Feedback will load as minimized immediately if they navigate to another page where it is set to show.	365 days
Sitecore
We use the Sitecore content management system (CMS) to power our website. It uses the following cookies to identify repeat visits from a single user and check if they are logged in:

Name	Description	Duration
SC_ANALYTICS_GLOBAL_COOKIE	To identify repeat visits from a single user, Sitecore sends a persistent session cookie to the web client.	The persistent session cookie expires one year after the last page requested from the solution by the web client.
SC_ANALYTICS_SESSION_COOKIE	To identify a sequence of HTTP requests from a single user, Sitecore sends an Engagement Analytics session cookie to the web client. The value of the analytics session cookie before the first pipe character ("|") matches a value in the VisitId column of the Visits table to identify an analytics visit record in the Analytics database.	This cookie expires when the user closes the Web client.
sc_expview	To identify if user is logged in to Sitecore CMS and viewing page in Experience Editor mode.	This cookie is set to false when the user logs out of Sitecore.
napierAcceptCookies	Stored to say that the user has accepted the “Accept Cookies” message.	20 years
LightboxSeen_{<page ID>}	Stored to say popup lightbox element seen on page detailed in page ID. This stops the same lightbox appearing for a set duration after the first view.	4 days
Video Service
Edinburgh Napier developed their own video service which is used to host content produced by staff and lecturers that we wouldn’t otherwise host on YouTube.  It uses the following cookie:

Name	Description	Duration
ASP.NET_SessionId	This cookie is created as soon as a user accesses the site.	Deleted when the user leaves the site, not persistent.
WordPress
We host a blog service for staff and students powered using the WordPress content management system (CMS).  The service features cookies that allows users to log in and also to monitor activity of users on the website, including:

Name	Description	Duration
PHPSESSID	This session cookie is created as soon as a user logs onto the admin system.	All cookies are deleted either when the user logs out of the service or closes down the browser.
__atuvc
_uid
 
These analytical cookies are added by addthis.com to enable and monitor page sharing via sharing buttons.	2 years
__utma
__utmb
__utmc
__utmz
 
These analytical cookies are created by Google Analytics and used to collect information about how visitors use our WordPress blog service, e.g. what pages they visit and how long they spend on the site.	2 years
YouTube
We embed videos from our official YouTube channel using YouTube's privacy-enhanced mode. This mode may set cookies on your computer once you click on the YouTube video player, but YouTube will not store personally-identifiable cookie information for playbacks of embedded videos using the privacy-enhanced mode. Find out more about YouTube's privacy-enhanced mode.

Third party cookies
We have no control over cookies used by third parties such as Google Analytics or YouTube. If you are concerned about cookies used by third parties, please visit All About Cookies to see how to control cookie usage.

Your privacy
Edinburgh Napier University is committed to protecting your privacy. View our privacy policy which sets out the basis on which your personal information is collected, processed and used.


I'm looking for ...

+
Advertiser Disclosure
You’re serious about security. So are we.
Our experts dig into the research, interview industry pros, and conduct hands-on testing to create simple, helpful guides that make it easy for you to get online—safely.
Antivirus
Guides and Tips
VPN
Guides and Tips
Password Managers
Guides and Tips
Ad Blockers
Guides and Tips
Identity Theft
Guides and Tips
What are cookies in computers?
Also known as browser cookies or tracking cookies, cookies are small, often encrypted text files, located in browser directories. They are used by web developers to help users navigate their websites efficiently and perform certain functions.

Due to their core role of enhancing/enabling usability or site processes, disabling cookies may prevent users from using certain websites.

Cookies are created when a user's browser loads a particular website. The website sends information to the browser which then creates a text file.

Every time the user goes back to the same website, the browser retrieves and sends this file to the website's server.

Computer cookies are created not just by the website the user is browsing but also by other websites that run ads, widgets, or other elements on the page being loaded.

These cookies regulate how the ads appear or how the widgets and other elements function on the page.

Learn more about managing cookies on different browsers.

Standard uses for browser cookies
Website servers set cookies to help authenticate the user if the user logs in to a secure area of the website. Login information is stored in a cookie so the user can enter and leave the website without having to re-enter the same authentication information over and over.

Session cookies are also used by the server to store information about user page activities so users can easily pick up where they left off on the server's pages. By default, web pages really don't have any 'memory'. Cookies tell the server what pages to show the user so the user doesn't have to remember or start navigating the site all over again.

Cookies act as a sort of “bookmark” within the site. Similarly, cookies can store ordering information needed to make shopping carts work instead of forcing the user to remember all the items the user put in the shopping cart.

Persistent or tracking cookies are also employed to store user preferences. Many websites allow the user to customize how information is presented through site layouts or themes. These changes make the site easier to navigate and/or let the user leave a part of the user's “personality” at the site.

Learn more about the different types of cookies.

Editor's Picks
 Top picks from our experts
How to Manage Cookies
How to Stop Facebook Ads
Best Ad Blockers for Android
Best Ad Blockers for Twitch
Total Adblock Review
Adblock Plus Review
What is a VPN?
How to Use a VPN on iPhone
NordVPN Review
NordVPN vs. PureVPN
Mullvad VPN Review
Best VPNs for Crunchyroll
How to Stop Your Phone from Listening to You
How to Scan Viruses on Android
How to Increase Your Internet Speed
McAfee+ Premium Antivirus Review
Norton 360 Antivirus Review
How to Protect Your Identity on the Internet
Cookie security and privacy issues
Cookies are NOT viruses. Cookies use a plain text format. They are not compiled pieces of code so they cannot be executed nor are they self-executing. Accordingly, they cannot make copies of themselves and spread to other networks to execute and replicate again.

Since they cannot perform these functions, they fall outside the standard virus definition.

Cookies CAN be used for malicious purposes though. Since they store information about a user's browsing preferences and history, both on a specific site and browsing among several sites, cookies can be used to act as a form of spyware.

Many anti-spyware products are well aware of this problem and routinely flag cookies as candidates for deletion after standard virus and/or spyware scans. See here for some privacy issues and concerns.

The way responsible and ethical web developers deal with privacy issues caused by cookie tracking is by including clear descriptions of how cookies are deployed on their site.

If you are a web developer and need advice on the implementation of cookies and a privacy policy, you can contact us by the inquiry form at the bottom of the page.

These privacy policies should explain what kind of information is collected and how the information is used. Organizations utilizing and displaying a proper and useful cookie policy and privacy policy include LinkedIn and Networkadvertising.org.

Most browsers have built-in privacy settings that provide differing levels of cookie acceptance, expiration time, and disposal after a user has visited a particular site. Backing up your computer can give you the peace of mind that your files are safe.

Computer cookies help
Computer cookies make our experience on the internet easier, quicker, and much less complicated.

Imagine trying to log in to your favorite website, social media account, or email and having to remember and type in your username and password every time — it would be almost impossible. Just to cope and make it easier you would probably start using the same username and password for every account which would be very dangerous and compromise your cybersecurity cookies are essential for internet surfing.

They help you and they help the website owner by helping to know their audience and customer.

Cookies help identify and recognize that it's you and allow you quick entry and they also help the website owner to identify the bad and malicious visitors who may be bots trying to enforce their way into the code of the website looking for vulnerabilities to place malicious and hijacking code that will give you malware.

Cookies don't identify you personally and they can't tell who you are but they can remember the device you are using and thus make it simpler for you to use.

Other cookie-based threats
Since identity protection is highly valued and is every internet user's right, it pays to be aware of what threat cookies can pose.

As cookies are transmitted back and forth between a browser and website, if an attacker or unauthorized person gets in between the data transmission, the sensitive cookie information can be intercepted.

Although relatively rare, this can happen if the browser is connecting to the server using an unencrypted network like a non-secured Wi-Fi channel.

Internet security is only attainable if you regularly use an antivirus protection program.

Other cookie-based attacks involve exploiting faulty cookie-setting systems on servers. If a website doesn't require browsers to use encrypted channels only, attackers can use this vulnerability to trick browsers into sending sensitive information over insecure channels.

The attackers then siphon off the sensitive data for unauthorized access purposes.

New laws for the use of cookies and other technologies that store online user information
On May 25, 2018, a set of new European privacy laws called the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) went into effect.

Rather than the "Opt out" option for website visitors, websites will need to specifically gain the consent of their visitors and they must "Opt In" to be able to store cookies on their computer or other devices.

This is expected to be difficult to manage and enforcement will more than likely be done subtlely and with encouragement rather than with the threat of fines and penalties.

Businesses in the EU have some great resources that can help them with their cookie compliance. The European Union has an internet handbook that explains to businesses their requirements under the legislation and has a 'cookie kit" to help them comply.

In 2018, California also signed new privacy regulations under the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA). Similar to the GDPR, the CCPA was created to protect consumers’ personal data and give businesses a set of standards to follow with regards to that data. Businesses must disclose what personal information is being collected and sold about their users. Users have the right to request that businesses delete their data and the right to opt out of data collection. The CCPA went into effect January 1, 2020.

What does the new law say?
Under the GDPR, the new requirement is essentially that cookies can only be placed on machines where the user or subscriber has given their consent.

6 (1) Subject to paragraph (4), a person shall not store or gain access to information stored, in the terminal equipment of a subscriber or user unless the requirements of paragraph (2) are met.

(2) The requirements are that the subscriber or user of that terminal equipment--
(a) is provided with clear and comprehensive information about the purposes of the storage of, or access to, that information; and
(b) has given his or her consent.

(3) Where an electronic communications network is used by the same person to store or access information in the terminal equipment of a subscriber or user on more than one occasion, it is sufficient for the purposes of this regulation that the requirements of paragraph (2) are met in respect of the initial use.

(3a) For the purposes of paragraph (2), consent may be signified by a subscriber who amends or sets controls on the internet browser which the subscriber uses or by using another application or program to signify consent.

(4) Paragraph (1) shall not apply to the technical storage of, or access to, information--
(a) for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network; or
(b) where such storage or access is strictly necessary for the provision of an information society service requested by the subscriber or user.

More information on the new changes can be found here.

Key tips for safe and responsible cookie-based web browsing
Due to their flexibility and the fact that many of the largest and most-visited websites use cookies by default, cookies are almost unavoidable. Disabling cookies will lock a user out of many of the most widely-used sites on the Internet like Youtube, Gmail, Yahoo Mail, and others.

Even search settings require cookies for language settings. Here are some tips you can use to ensure worry-free cookie-based browsing:

Customize your browser's cookie settings to reflect your comfort level with cookie security or use our guide to delete cookies.

If you are very comfortable with cookies and you are the only person using your computer, you may want to set long expiration time frames for storing your personal access information and browsing history.

If you share access on your computer, you may want to set your browser to clear private browsing data every time you close your browser.

While not as secure as rejecting cookies outright, this option lets you access cookie-based websites while deleting any sensitive information after your browsing session.

Install and keep antispyware applications updated
Many spyware detection, cleanup applications, and spyware removers include attack site detection. They block your browser from accessing websites designed to exploit browser vulnerabilities or download malicious software.

Make sure your browser is updated
If you haven't already, set your browser to update automatically. This eliminates security vulnerabilities caused by outdated browsers. Many cookie-based exploits are based on exploiting older browsers' security shortcomings.

Cookies are everywhere and can't really be avoided if you wish to enjoy the biggest and best websites out there. With a clear understanding of how they operate and how they help your browsing experience, you can take the necessary security measures to ensure that you browse the Net confidently.

Managing mobile cookies and security
The mobile landscape is so much broader than a single platform.

We cover mobile cookie use plus cybersecurity issues that can be found in the mobile sector.

Knowing how to safely surf the web is one of the most important aspects of personal cyber security and education is one of the most powerful tools.

Included below are a few points to keep in mind when using your Android/iPhone (or any mobile device) to ensure that you are safe and secure on the web.

Cookies are just text files that store information about your computer or mobile device. These cookies can be necessary for the website to operate and function.
Be skeptical! Always research a program or application before installation. Research the application and the app developer to establish credibility. Review the product/developer website for customer support phone numbers or emails and review the social media pages to see what people are saying about the product.
Avoid downloading apps or programs that found you. If you did not actively seek a program then avoid installing apps from pushy ads or automatic downloads.
Stay current with application and operating system updates. Updates often include security patches that are designed to fix newly discovered vulnerabilities.
Install and USE an antivirus application to protect you from threats that slip past your personal defense.
AS SEEN ON
Explore Popular Topics
Antivirus
Guides and Tips
VPN
Guides and Tips
Password Managers
Guides and Tips
Ad Blockers
Guides and Tips
Identity Theft
Guides and Tips

Copyright © 2024 All About Cookies
111 E. Atlantic Ave., Suite 200
Delray Beach, FL 33444
All About Cookies is an informational website that provides tips, advice, and recommendations to help you with Online Privacy, Identity Theft Prevention, Antivirus Protection, and Digital Security. We strive to provide up-to-date information, but make no warranties regarding the accuracy of our information. Ultimately, you are responsible for your digital security. All About Cookies is not a digital security product and does not provide any digital security products.
About Us
Privacy Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information
Terms of Use
DMCA

Home
Spectacles
Download
Store
Stories
Map
Lens Studio
Kit
Snapcodes
Support
Snap Logo
Business Help Center
How can we help?
Privacy and Security
Getting Started
Account Management
Ad Creation
Campaign Setup
Campaign Performance
Troubleshooting
Privacy and Security
Snap Advertiser Privacy and Security FAQs
Snap and Advertiser Obligations FAQ
Snap Ads and European Laws FAQs
Snap and U.S. State Privacy Laws
Snap’s Subprocessors
European Digital Services Act (DSA)
Snap and iOS 14 Resource Hub
Advanced Conversions
Estimated Conversions
Contact Us

Snap Ads and European Laws FAQs
This section provides additional information on EU laws that are relevant to Snapchat Ads. 

Advertiser data relating to EEA and UK data subjects
How does Snap protect the personal data of advertisers’ EEA/UK customers?
When you provide personal data that relates to your UK/EEA customers, Snap processes this data as a data processor, distinct from Snap’s own user data. When we process personal data on your behalf, we do so in accordance with your instructions and to provide the advertising services you requested. For example, we may use the data you provide to Snap to create a custom audience for you (Snap Customer List Audiences), and the data you provide to us may be hashed (SHA-256) prior to sharing with Snap. If you use the Snap Pixel / Conversion API, we enable you to target visitors of your websites and apps on Snapchat. See Customer Audiences and the FAQs in the Install Pixel Section of our Business Help Center for more information.

Data Processing Agreement 
Do advertisers need Snap to sign their own data processing agreement to comply with GDPR and UK data protection laws?
Snap makes a standard Data Processing Agreement available as part of its click-through advertiser business terms. Snap's Data Processing Agreement reflects the specific functionalities of Snap’s advertising services and is compliant with GDPR and UK data protection laws. Whenever there are changes in applicable data protection laws, we update our data processing agreement and our advertiser-facing terms so that we can assist our advertisers with their own compliance obligations. 

How does Snap ensure its subprocessors handling advertiser data are compliant?
Snap requires third parties that process advertisers’ customer personal data on our behalf (“subprocessors”) to sign data processing agreements that comply with the GDPR and require the same level of privacy and security that applies to Snap under Snap's Data Processing Agreement.  

What about subprocessors handling advertiser data that are located outside the EEA/UK and Swiss?
Snap only transfers European individuals’ personal data provided by advertisers outside of the European Union, the UK and Switzerland using one of the European Commission-approved transfer mechanisms. Snap Inc. has certified that it complies with the EU-U.S. and Swiss-U.S. Data Privacy Frameworks, and the UK Extension to the EU-U.S. DPF (the “DPF”). 

If Snap uses a subprocessor that is not located in a country deemed “adequate” by the European Commission, Switzerland and the ICO, Snap uses Standard Contractual Clauses (SCCs) as its lawful transfer mechanism. If you have signed an NDA with Snap, you can access more information on transfers in Snap’s Whistic profile here. If you are unable to access our profile, you can reach out to our team via this form.

How does Snap support notifying authorities of breaches of personal data?
Snap has in place a robust data breach incident response plan and we are prepared to meet the breach notification requirements under the GDPR and UK data protection laws. Our breach investigation procedures are designed to facilitate an efficient and comprehensive investigation and make the proper notifications.

Will Snap assist with audits?
Yes. The GDPR and UK data protection laws require data processors to grant audit rights to data controllers; these rights are detailed in Snap's Data Processing Agreement. 

Will Snap respect my request to delete or return personal data?
Yes. As detailed in Snap's Data Processing Agreement, Snap will delete or return personal data at your request. In some cases, Snap may store anonymized and aggregated personal data to improve its services.   

Transfers 
Are advertisers transferring customer personal data to Snap entities outside the EEA or UK? 
If you are an advertiser in Europe, you do not transfer personal data relating to your customers directly to Snap entities outside of the EEA or the UK. As a European or UK advertiser, you provide such personal data to Snap’s European and UK entities, such as Snap Camera GmBH, Snap Europe SAS and Snap Group Limited (SGL) under Snap’s Business Services Terms and Data Processing Agreement. In the case of SGL, the United Kingdom has received an adequacy decision from the European Commission. 

Do advertisers need Snap to sign their own data transfer agreement? 
No. If you are an advertiser in Europe you will contract directly with our Snap entities in the European Union and if you’re a UK advertiser you contract with Snap Group Limited, Snap’s UK entity. This structure means that you don’t transfer data directly to Snap entities outside of the EEA or the UK. The EU and UK entities may transfer data to non-EU/UK Snap entities who perform subprocessor activities. Snap Inc. complies with the DPF. The DPF serves as a transfer mechanism to account for (the internal) transfers of data to the US and Snap entities have entered into an inter-company agreement. We may use alternative transfer mechanisms to account for instances where transfers are not covered by an adequacy decision. To account for these instances, our inter-company agreement also incorporates current EU Standard Contractual Clauses (SCCs) and UK International Data Transfer Agreement (IDTA) terms. Even though we account for these transfers internally, we provide additional assurance to our advertisers. Advertisers can rely on Snap Inc.’s DPF certification that can be viewed on the DPF list. In addition, we have also incorporated the latest EU SCCs and UK IDTA terms (with you as data exporter and Snap Inc as data importer) into the Snap Business Services Terms. These data transfer terms can be found here: Data Transfer Agreement and may apply to in-scope transfers not covered by our DPF certification and/or an adequacy decision. 

What about transfers to the UK or Switzerland?
To account for internal transfers to the UK or Switzerland (Snap Group Limited and Snap Switzerland GmbH), Snap relies on the UK and Switzerland adequacy decisions from the European Commission. The UK adequacy decision could expire on 27 June 2025 if it is not extended. Snap will monitor any relevant changes. 

Where can advertisers find information to conduct a transfer impact assessment ?  
If you have signed a NDA, you can find necessary information to carry out transfer impact assessments in Snaps’ Whistic profile here. If you are unable to access our profile, you can reach out to our team via this form.

Children
Does Snap allow advertisers to upload personal data of EEA/UK children for ad targeting?
No. While Snapchat is directed to individuals who are 13+, Snap Ads does not match customer personal data uploaded by advertisers via our Pixel/Conversion API or Customer List Audiences to teenage accounts (i.e. between 13-17 years old) in the UK and the EEA for personalized advertising. See also changes made as a result of the Digital Services Act below.

Digital Services Act 
How will the Digital Services Act impact advertising transparency on Snap? 
Snap maintains a Political and Advocacy Ads Library and an Ads Gallery, which provides an overview of ads that have run on Snap in the EU over the past year and some details about the targeting and reach of those ads, such as whether the information is an ad, on whose behalf advertising is presented and (if this differs) the person or organization who paid for the ad, and the content of ads. 

How will the Digital Services Act impact targeted advertising on Snap?
As a result of the Digital Services Act, Snap made changes to the personalization and ranking of ads served to EU and UK Snapchatters who are either under 18, or have opted out of receiving personalized advertising. 

What limitations apply when targeting these Snapchatters? 

Adults who opt out: Snap already allowed Snapchatters to opt-out of the use of Event Data and Customer List Data (explained earlier in this FAQ) for targeted advertising on Snapchat. With the introduction of the DSA, EU Snapchatters are also able to opt-out of profiling-based advertising. If they do, in addition to disabling targeted ad use of Event Data and Customer List Data, ads will also not be personalized (e.g. targeted) based on aspects like certain historic content profiles or inferred interests. They will still receive advertising that is personalized based on certain contextual information and information for safeguarding or legal requirements, such as age, language, location, device information and current content/ad.
Teens: With the introduction of the DSA, in addition to disabling targeted ad use of Event Data and Customer List Data, ads to teenage accounts in the UK and EU will not be personalized (e.g. targeted) based on aspects like certain historic content profiles or inferred interests. They will still receive advertising that is personalized based on certain contextual information and information for safeguarding or legal requirements, such as age, language, location, device information and current content/ad.

Special Category Data: The Digital Services Act also prohibits online platforms from displaying advertising to users (including non-minors) based on profiling using special categories of personal data. Snap has never allowed targeting based on special categories of data so this will not result in any changes to Snapchat Ads.

Related Articles
Ads Manager Overview
Samba Overview
Public Profiles Metrics and Analytics
Setting Up CAPI for Google Tag Manager
Snap Pixel for Shopify Merchants FAQs
Can’t find what you’re looking for?

Contact Us
Company
Snap Inc.
Jobs
News
Community
Support
Community Guidelines
Safety Center
Advertising
Buy Ads
Advertising Policies
Political Ads Library
Brand Guidelines
Promotions Rules
Legal
Privacy Center
Cookie Policy
Report Infringement
Custom Creative Tools Terms
Community Geofilter Terms
Lens Studio Terms
Language


English
© 2021 Snap Inc.Privacy PolicyTerms of Service


Website
This site and its contents are protected by copyright. The webpages may be viewed, printed or downloaded for personal, non-commercial use only. No part of this website may be modified, reproduced, transmitted, published or otherwise made available in whole or in part without the prior written consent of an authorised representative of the University. These terms and conditions are governed by and construed in accordance with Scots Law. To contact us with regard to the website or to use any of its content please email internet@napier.ac.uk.

FOI publication scheme
Unless otherwise stated, Edinburgh Napier University reserves copyright in all information available under this publication, regardless of format or media. The right to information under the publication scheme does not include permission to reproduce that information and consent of the copyright holder should always be sought.

Legal disclaimer
You use this website at your own risk. Whilst every attempt is made to ensure that information is accurate and up to date, Edinburgh Napier University is not responsible or liable for any damage or loss whatsoever arising from viewing, downloading, using or relying on information from the website. The University reserves the right to alter or amend the website without prior notice.

For information and convenience only this website contains links to sites operated by third parties, over which Edinburgh Napier University has no control and in respect of which the University accepts no liability.

For links to and an overview of the information covered by each category see the sections below.

8.1 General information
Name and address 
Principal Officers 
Contact information 
Location  
Opening hours  
Academic year dates 
Holidays 
Complaints 
Document serving (ie contact details for serving legal documents) 
8.2 Access to information
How to make a request for information and freedom of information enquiries contact 
Information legislation policies 
Records Management and archiving policy 
8.3 Governance
Legal Framework 
Governance Structure 
Governance precepts (ie compliance with good rules of conduct) 
Conflict of interest policy  
Register of interests 
Institutional structure 
Major committees 
Relationship with the General Council (Edinburgh Napier University does not have a General Council) 
General Council 
Subsidiary companies 
Honorary degrees
8.4 Financial resources
Financial statements 
Budgetary processes 
Budget overview 
Financial regulations 
Insurance 
Senior staff remuneration 
Investments 
8.5 Corporate planning
Edinburgh Napier University's Mission Statement 
Corporate Plan 
Strategies 
Performance indicators 
Planning procedures 
8.6 Procurement
Procurement policies 
Procurement procedures 
Procurement contracts 
Tender documentation 
Supplier contracts 
8.7 Management of research and development
Research funding 
Research quality 
Research strategies 
Research management structures 
Research support arrangements 
Research ethics   
Research students policies and procedures
8.8 Commercialisation and knowledge transfer
Support arrangements 
Contract information 
Commercialisation funding 
Commercialisation resources 
Commercialisation outcomes 
Consultancy services
8.9 Human resources
Staff profile 
Recruitment policies 
Employment terms 
Performance management 
Promotion 
Pensions 
Discipline 
Grievance 
Employee relations 
Public interest disclosure 
Staff development 
Staff records 
Staff facilities
8.10 Physical resources
Description of estate 
Estate development plans 
Buildings under construction 
Maintenance 
Estates indicators 
Environmental policies 
8.11 Health and safety
Policies 
Annual Reports and statistics  
8.12 Equality and diversity
Equal opportunities policies and guidance 
Equal opportunities consultation 
Equality management infrastructure
8.13 Support for disabled people
Disability policies 
Support structures 
Accessibility of buildings and services  
Contacts 
Strategies 
Statistics
8.14 Student administration and support
Course information 
Recruitment and admissions 
Fees and charges 
Scholarships and bursaries 
Registration 
Induction 
Examinations 
Progression 
Learning support provision 
Student liaison 
Student records 
Student discipline 
Student accommodation 
Graduation arrangements 
Student complaints 
Student facilities 
Relationship with Students Union / Association 
Students Union / Association
8.15 Teaching quality
Programme approval 
Assessment 
Student satisfaction 
Institutional internal reviews 
Professional accreditation of courses by external bodies 
Validation 
Assessments of Edinburgh Napier University's provision by the Quality Assurance Agency
8.16 Information services
Library facilities 
Computing facilities 
Other information facilities 
Major strategy documents 
Collections 
Collection strategy 
Open archives 
Other archive facilities and special collections
8.17 External and community relations
Alumni 
Community Relations 
Development activities 
Public Relations
8.18 Government and regulator relations
Funding body statistical reports and returns 
Other statutory reports 
Information on student admission, progression and completion
More information is available in the Commissioner's Guide to Publication Schemes, available from the Scottish Commissioner's website.

8.1 General information
This category covers general information about how to make contact with Edinburgh Napier University.

8.2 Access to information and records management policies
This category tells people how to request information from Edinburgh Napier University, both under the FOI (Scotland) Act and the Data Protection Act.

8.3 Governance
This category covers information relating to the way Edinburgh Napier University is governed and how decisions are made.

8.4 Financial resources
This category covers information on Edinburgh Napier University's strategy and management of financial resources.

8.5 Corporate planning
This category covers information on Edinburgh Napier University's mission and major strategic plans.

8.6 Procurement
Collaborative procurements may be led by central bodies such as Procurement Scotland, APUC Limited and so on.

8.7 Management of research
This category covers information relating to Edinburgh Napier University's management and funding of its research activities.

8.8 Commercialisation and knowledge transfer
This category provides information relating to our mechanisms for supporting the commercialisation of outputs from its research activities.

8.9 Human resources
This category covers information on Edinburgh Napier University's strategy and management of human resources.

8.10 Physical resources (includes our estate and environmental policies)
This category covers information ata strategic level relating to Edinburgh Napier University's management of its physical resources.

8.11 Health and safety
This category covers information about Edinburgh Napier University's health & safety and risk assessment policies, procedures and record.

8.12 Equality and diversity
This category provides information about Edinburgh Napier University's policies and strategies regarding equality and diversity.

8.13 Support for disabled people
This category covers information about Edinburgh Napier University's policies, procedures and support for disabled people.

8.14 Student administration and support
This category contains information on how Edinburgh Napier University manages the administration and progression of our students.

8.15 Teaching quality
This category contains information regarding the management of teaching quality in Edinburgh Napier University.

8.16 Information services
This category covers those functions within Edinburgh Napier University that provide access to information.

8.17 External and community relations
This category covers information relating to Edinburgh Napier University's relationship with its external environment.

8.18 Government and regulator relations
This category covers the information we give to government, external regulators and information provided to the Scottish Funding Council.

Edinburgh Napier is currently offering a 20% discount on Masters tuition fees to our graduates for year one of their full-time postgraduate degree. Please read our T&C's below before submitting an application.
Terms and Conditions
The Edinburgh Napier University Graduate Discount Scheme offers a 20% reduction in tuition fee costs to alumni who have graduated with an undergraduate or postgraduate taught degree from Edinburgh Napier University or any of its antecedent institutions. Students who have completed a period of study at Edinburgh Napier as part of an Exchange or Study Abroad Year, are also eligible to apply for the discount.

The Graduate Discount Scheme is available to Home, EU, RUK and overseas students and can be applied to full-time, part-time and distance learning modes of study. However, Overseas-delivered and programmes taught in conjunction with other universities are excluded from this scheme.

The discount is applied to the tuition fee element of the programme costs ONLY. It is not applied to any additional costs, including research costs and fieldwork fees.

The discount applies only to the portion of the tuition fee which the student is personally responsible for paying; including payment via a SAAS Postgraduate Loan, Commercial Bank Loan or other personal payment method. Any portion of the tuition fees being paid for by an employer, government, or external sponsor will not be eligible for the discount.

Tuition fees which are being paid in-full by an employer, government or external sponsor are excluded from the Graduate Discount Scheme. The fee reduction is only applicable on the full rate of fee as published on our website; any student who is enrolling on a programme via a third party partner with an alternative fee structure is not eligible to receive the discount.

The Graduate Discount Scheme applies to new Postgraduate students starting on a January, September or May intake programmes only. The discount cannot be applied retrospectively. The discount can only be applied to year one of a full-time Postgraduate degree, any additional years are exempt from the discount. For part time Postgraduate degrees the discount will apply to years one, two and three only. Any additional years will be exempt from the discount.

Withdrawal from a course will result in a refund of the self-funded portion of the tuition fees only. This will be calculated pro-rata.

Applicants must make it clear on their application that they would like to be considered for the Graduate Discount Scheme. Applicants must provide evidence that they are, or will be, an Edinburgh Napier Graduate by the dates stated above for the course intake month applied for. Educational Qualification Certificates or Transcripts are requested as part of the application process and should provide adequate proof of achieved or pending alumni status.

Applicants who have completed any of the following undergraduate and postgraduate taught degrees at Edinburgh Napier University are eligible to apply for the Graduate Discount Scheme.

Any of the following as a bachelor’s degree (SCQF level 9), a bachelor’s degree with distinction (SCQF level 9), a bachelor’s degree with honours (SCQF level 10) or a Masters degree (SCQF level 11):

Bachelor of Arts (BA)
Bachelor of Design (BDes)
Bachelor of Education (BEd)
Bachelor of Engineering (BEng)
Bachelor of Midwifery (BMid)
Bachelor of Music (BMus)
Bachelor of Nursing (BNurs)
Bachelor of Science (BSc)
Bachelor of Laws (LLB)
The degree of Master of Arts (MA)
The degree of Master of Business Administration (MBA)
The degree of Master of Design (MDes)
The degree of Master of Fine Arts (MFA)
The degree of Master of Laws (LLM)
The degree of Master of Music (MMus)
The degree of Master of Science (MSc)
The following postgraduate programmes of study are eligible programmes for the Graduate Discount Scheme:

The degree of Master of Arts (MA)
The degree of Master of Business Administration (MBA)
The degree of Master of Design (MDes)
The degree of Master of Fine Arts (MFA)
The degree of Master of Laws (LLM)
The degree of Master of Music (MMus)
The degree of Master of Science (MSc)
Masters by Research (MA by Res or MSc by Res)
The following postgraduate programmes of study are excluded from the Graduate Discount Scheme:

All Postgraduate Certificate programmes
All Postgraduate Diploma programmes, including Postgraduate Diploma in Education.
Masters Top Up
Pre-registration Nursing and Midwifery programmes, including Masters in Nursing and Masters in Midwifery.
Programmes delivered in collaboration with other higher education establishments
CPD (continuing professional development) programmes are also excluded unless you are enrolled to complete one of the eligible taught postgraduate qualifications.
Contact us
Contact our advisers on 0333 900 6040 or use our online enquiry form

Home Privacy policyFacebook Twitter LinkedIn Email
Edinburgh Napier University ("We") are committed to protecting your privacy and have adopted this privacy policy to set out the basis on which your personal information is collected, processed and used.
Data Protection
Edinburgh Napier University is, and always has been, committed to respecting your privacy and protecting your personal information. As the Data Controller of the personal data we collect, we have policies, procedures and privacy notices in place under the UK Data Protection Act 2018 and UK General Data Protection Regulation (UK-GDPR) (which together are referred to as the “Data Protection legislation” below).

For more information on what information we use and how we collect and use it, please see our Data Protection pages using the following links:

Data Protection Policy statement and Code of Practice
Privacy Notices
By using our Website you understand and agree to the collection and use of your information as outlined in this Privacy Policy. If this statement is changed we will post these changes on this page .

If you have any questions regarding the use of your personal data or want to know more about your rights under the legislation or how the University complies with the legislation please contact the Data Protection Officer at dataprotection@napier.ac.uk.

Information we may collect from you
We may collect and process the following data about you:
Information that you provide by filling in forms on our website www.napier.ac.uk (the "Website")
Details of applications you make through our Website
If you contact us, including via our online enquiry service, we may keep a record of that correspondence
Details of your visits to our Website and the resources that you access
We may ask you to complete surveys that we use for research purposes although you do not have to respond to them.
If you submit personal information to us, for example your name and email address, we may link this information with any other information we have collected about you.

If you choose to contact us by other methods e.g. email, phone, letter, etc. we will also process your personal data to respond to you and provide any services or goods in connection with your contact/enquiry/request. Please see our Privacy Notices for more specific information.

We may engage in marketing activities which use your personal data. This could include sharing data with third party operated social networks such as Meta, where this information is matched against the social network’s own databases in order to provide you with the most relevant information.  

The details you provide will not be used for advertising purposes unless you have expressly consented to having your details used in this way.

Edinburgh Napier use of visitor statistics
When you visit our website our systems automatically collects information about your computer, including where available your IP address (a unique number assigned to your computer when you are using your browser on the internet), operating system and browser type to monitor customer traffic patterns and website usage.
 
This statistical data does not contain any personally identifiable information about you or any of our users. It is used to enhance the design and layout of the Website making it easier to navigate.
These statistics are very much like television ratings that tell the networks how many people tuned in to a particular programme. We only use this type of data in aggregate i.e. we look at the data collectively, in summary form, rather than on an individual basis.

Some of this non-identifiable data may be passed to a third party GDPR-compliant data visualisation provider, Supermetrics. 

We use these to integrate user engagement data from channels such as Google Analytics and Facebook. This provides us with a single report on multiple channels at once. These reports tell us which channels are the most useful and engaging for our users and help the University make decisions on which channels are the most effective to reach our audiences in the future. 

Supermetrics deals with encrypted data only that is not personally identifiable to individual users. The encrypted data is not held by them any longer than it takes to provide the data visualisation reports.
Read more about Supermetric's security and data privacy commitments.

Cookies
We use cookies to collect our statistics about your visit. Cookies are small text files that are placed on your computer and are widely used in order to make websites work, or work more efficiently, as well as to provide information to the owners of the site.
We will also collect any information you give to us through our submission forms, like our contact form. If you submit information to us, including a name and email address, we may link this information with the information we have automatically collected about you.
Please view the University's Statement on the Use of Cookies for detailed information on the cookies we use and the purposes for which we use them.

Where we store your personal data
The data that we collect from you may be transferred to, and stored at, a destination outside the UK and European Economic Area ("EEA"). It may also be processed by staff operating outside the UK and EEA who work for us or for one of our suppliers. By submitting your personal data, you understand and agree to this transfer, storing or processing.
We will take all steps reasonably necessary to ensure that your data is treated securely and in accordance with this privacy policy. Where we have given you (or where you have chosen) a password which enables you to access certain parts of our site, you are responsible for keeping this password confidential. We ask you not to share a password with anyone.
Usage made of the information
The information you have given us will be stored on our computer systems and used in the following ways:
Marketing: In order that we may keep you informed by post, email, telephone or other electronic means of the news, events or services that may be of interest (provided you have opted-in to receive such communications). You can opt out at any time
Web statistics: To improve the service to our clients and to analyse our Website's use without identifying you as an individual
Market Research: From time to time we may ask you to take part in research surveys to assist us with improving our service to existing and potential students
Processing applications made by you
To carry out our obligations to you, such as notifying you about changes to our terms and conditions
Legal Bases for Processing
The legal bases the University relies upon primarily are:

Article 6(1)(e): for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of the official authority vested in the controller, namely the University’s Statutory Instruments: “for the objects of providing education, carrying out research, and promoting teaching, research and general scholarship” and the administration and support thereof. We rely on this legal basis for dealing with enquiries and sending service messages relative to your enquiry; processing applications; using website statistics to improve our website and services; marketing research and carrying out other associated obligations.
Article 6(1)(b): processing is necessary in order to take steps at the request of the data subject (prior to entering into a contract or, in this case, making an application to the University), including corresponding with you about your application and keeping you informed of further information related to your application to the University. The possible/consequences of failure to provide/process the personal data requested are that the University would be unable to provide the goods/services/information you have requested.
Article 6(1)(a); the University asks for your consent to send you electronic marketing, other than service messages related to your enquiry/application. You have the option to unsubscribe from marketing messages at any time by clicking on the ‘unsubscribe’ link in the marketing message or updating your settings in your social media account. Increasingly, browsers and operating systems also allow marketing preferences to be changed or blocked.
Article 6(1)(f): The University relies upon legitimate interests, as the legal basis for operating web filtering and other system scanning and protection systems and services in order to protect the University’s website and network, as it is in the legitimate interests of the Controller to protect its information systems from misuse. 
Further information about the legal bases used for specific purposes can be found on our main Privacy Notice page: staff.napier.ac.uk/dpstatements.
Disclosure of your information
Subject to the exceptions set out below, we will not disclose your personal information to third parties including other constituents of Edinburgh Napier University unless we are allowed, or required, to by law.
We may disclose your personal information:

To comply with any legal obligation e.g. search warrant, subpoena, court order.
To protect the rights, property, or safety of Edinburgh Napier University or others (this includes exchanging information with companies and organisations for purposes of fraud protection and credit risk reduction).
To investigate reports of users sending material using a false email address or users sending harassing, threatening, or abusive messages.
To protect against misuse or unauthorised use of our Website.
During emergencies, e.g. when we believe someone's physical safety is at risk.
Accepting this statement acknowledges that we will not be responsible for damages you or any others may suffer as a result of the disclosure of your personal information in accordance with the above.

Rights and access to information
The Data Protection legislation gives you certain rights, including the right to access information held about you. For further information about how to exercise your rights please see our Data Protection Rights Guide.
Security
Even the best policy cannot protect your online privacy and security in all circumstances. Your best protection is to understand the limits to privacy on the Internet and use common sense in all of your online activities. Be aware that email is an inherently insecure form of communication. Remember that in extreme cases third parties are sometimes able to intercept your unencrypted messages.
Edinburgh Napier University is concerned about the security of your personal information particularly when using our Website. Although we have taken all reasonable security precautions, we cannot guarantee internet security and subsequently cannot guarantee that any information you input on our Website is totally secure. In addition to our online security efforts, we have taken steps to protect your personal data offline as well. All of your information is restricted to our offices. Employees are granted access on a need-to-know basis and are kept up-to-date on our security and privacy practices.

Your control over your personal information
At any time you can withdraw permission for the use of your personal information. This can be done either by ticking the OPT-OUT or UNSUBSCRIBE link contained in all Edinburgh Napier University web communications, or alternatively, by sending an email requesting this to dataprotection@napier.ac.uk. 
Our Website may, from time to time, contain links to and from other websites. If you follow a link to any of these websites, please note that these websites have their own privacy policies and that we do not accept any responsibility or liability for these policies.

Enquiry, application & alumni processes
If you wish to enquire or apply to Edinburgh Napier University you will be asked to submit your details into our customer databases. When you do this you will have the option to 'opt-in' to receiving e-newsletters and other communications from us. You can unsubscribe from these by clicking the unsubscribe link or by sending an email to info@napier.ac.uk with REMOVE in the subject line.
We also have a press news list which you can join by emailing EdNapierNews@Napier.ac.uk. To unsubscribe from this list email EdNapierNews@napier.ac.uk with REMOVE in the subject line.

We maintain a database of our alumni and proactively keep them engaged about our alumni services. Find out more about how the University handles alumni data here.

Events registration on externally hosted services
Please note that by registering for an event via a service such as Eventbrite (which will host your data out with the EEA) or Bookitbee (which will host your data in the EEA) you will be supplying your personal data to the company/website and as such you are accepting and consenting to the practices in their Privacy Policies.

Edinburgh Napier University is not affiliated with these companies/websites in any way and is using their services solely for the purposes of facilitating event ticketing and registration and does not accept any responsibility or liability for personal data which you have chosen to provide to such third party sites.

Further information
Privacy Notices for Students, Staff and all other ‘layered’ Privacy Notices can be accessed online here.

For further information, please see the University's Data Protection Policy Statement

How to contact us
In writing to:
Governance Services

Edinburgh Napier University

Sighthill Campus

EH11 4BN

Email: dataprotection@napier.ac.uk 

Last updated: March 2023

Padlocked Notebook PCData Protection Policy Statement
 

Edinburgh Napier University (“the University”) is committed to protecting the rights and freedoms of individuals with respect to the processing of their personal data. This is done in accordance with: 

Data Protection legislation (“the legislation”), now known as the UK GDPR.  The Privacy and Electronic Communications (Amendments etc) (EU Exit) Regulations 2019 amended the EU General Data Protection Regulation 2016 (EU GDPR) and together with the Data Protection Act 2018 the legislation is now known as the “UK GDPR” and referred to as “the legislation” below. 
Associated legislation, in light of relevant case law and appropriate guidance (e.g. from the ICO)
The University’s registration with the UK Information Commissioner. 


1. Compliance
1.1  All individuals (employees, students, agents, associates, contracted parties both paid and unpaid, etc.) processing personal data on behalf of the University are required to comply with:

Data protection law

The University’s Data Protection Code of Practice, Information Security and Manual Data Security Policies 

Associated University policies, procedures and guidance on the provisions and practical implementation of the legislation




1.2  These requirements apply to all personal data created and received, regardless of where it is held and irrespective of the ownership of the equipment used, if the processing is for the University’s purposes. 



1.3  Any breach of the University’s policies, procedures or guidance may result in liability for the University and internal disciplinary action being taken. 



2. Responsibilities
2.1  All employees and agents processing personal data for and on behalf of the University are responsible for ensuring that any such processing complies with the legislation.



2.2  All line managers are responsible for ensuring that the processing of personal data carried out in their School/Service Area is compliant with the legislation and that employees reporting to them are aware of their responsibilities under the legislation and have received training.



2.3  Governance Services​ and the Data Protection Officer (DPO) are responsible for overseeing compliance, developing guidance and providing advice and training to employees.



2.4  The University Secretary has overall responsibility for ensuring that the University complies with data protection and associated legislation



3. The Data Protection Principles 
The Data Protection legislation sets out six principles governing the use of personal information with which all University users must comply unless an exemption applies. These principles ensure that personal information is: 

1)  Processed fairly, lawfully and transparently
2)  Processed for limited purposes 

3)  Adequate, relevant and limited to what is required only (data minimisation)

4)  Accurate and up to date

5)  Not kept for longer than is necessary for the purposes it was collected and processed for (storage limitation)

6)  Kept securely using both technical and organisational measures (integrity and confidentiality) 



Additionally, there are requirements to:








7)  Keep written records of processing to demonstrate compliance (accountability)

8)  Process personal in line with individuals’ rights

9)  Not transfer personal data to other countries without adequate protection



The University's Data Protection Code of Practice provides further information and is available at:  Data Protection Code of Practice.



Special Category (Sensitive) and Criminal Conviction Personal Data Processing
The University processes special category data, as defined in Article 9 of the UK General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). We also process some criminal offence data, as defined in Article 10 of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and section 11(2) of the Data Protection Act 2018 (DPA 2018). This data must be processed in accordance with the requirements of the GDPR and, where applicable, Schedule 1 of the Data Protection Act 2018 (DPA 2018).



Some of the conditions for processing special category and criminal offence data, as set out in DPA 2018 Schedule 1, require us to have an Appropriate Policy Document (APD) in place. The APD must set out and explain our procedures for securing compliance with the principles in Article 5 of the GDPR and our policies regarding the retention and erasure of such personal data.



1. Purpose
1.1 This document explains our processing in relation to special category and criminal offence data and satisfies the requirement to have an APD in place, as set out in Schedule 1, Part 4 of the DPA 2018.



2. Scope
2.1 This policy applies to all processing of special category or criminal offence data, undertaken by or on behalf of the University, which is based on a condition in Schedule 1 of the DPA which requires an APD.



2.2 Special category data is defined at Article 9 of the GDPR as personal data revealing:

Racial or ethnic origin;
Political opinions;
Religious or philosophical beliefs;
Trade union membership;
Genetic data;
Biometric data for the purpose of uniquely identifying a natural person;
Data concerning health; or
Data concerning a natural person’s sex life or sexual orientation.


2.3 ‘Criminal conviction data’ covers processing in relation to criminal convictions and offences or related security measures. It also includes personal data relating to the alleged commission of offences or proceedings for an offence committed or alleged to have been committed, including sentencing.



3. Conditions for Processing
3.1 We process special categories of personal data as set out in the University’s Privacy Notices, available online.



4. Compliance with the Principles
4.1 Principle (a): lawfulness, fairness and transparency

We have put in place appropriate measures to ensure we meet this principle. These include:

ensuring that we always meet relevant lawful basis/bases for processing, including at least one of the conditions in Schedule 1, where required;
providing clear and transparent information about why we process personal data including our lawful basis for processing in the University Privacy Notices and
setting out our main processing activities in the University Privacy Notices


4.2 Principle (b): purpose limitation

Our purposes for processing are set out in the University Privacy Notices.

We will not process personal data for purposes incompatible with the original purpose it was collected for.



4.3 Principle (c): data minimisation

We collect personal data necessary for the relevant purposes and ensure it is not excessive. The information we process is necessary for and proportionate to our purposes. Where personal data is provided to us or obtained by us, but is not relevant to our stated purposes, we will erase it.



4.4 Principle (d): accuracy

Where we become aware that personal data is inaccurate or out of date, having regard to the purpose for which it is being processed, we will take every reasonable step to ensure that data is erased or rectified without delay. If we decide not to either erase or rectify it, for example because the lawful basis we rely on to process the data means these rights don’t apply, we will document our decision.



4.5 Principle (e): storage limitation

All special category or criminal conviction data processed by us is retained for the periods set out in the University Records Retention Schedules. Retention periods for this data are based on our business needs, best practice and/or legal obligations. Our retention schedules are reviewed regularly and updated when necessary.



4.6 Principle (f): integrity and confidentiality (security)

Electronic information is processed within our secure network. For services provided locally by Information Services, information is stored on servers located in secure University data centres. These data centres are resilient and feature access controls, environmental monitoring, backup power supplies and redundant hardware. Information on these servers is backed up regularly. The University has various data protection and information security policies and procedures to ensure that appropriate organisational and technical measures are in place to protect the privacy or your personal data. The University makes use of a number of third party, including “cloud”, services for information storage and processing. Through procurement and contract management procedures the University ensures that these services have appropriate organisational and technical measures to comply with data protection legislation. Specific local processes include secured paper forms and files, password protected e-files, encrypted emails, etc. and the use of third party systems which the University ensures have the necessary technical and organisational security and contractual measures in place to protect the data.



Hard copy information is processed in line with appropriate security procedures. Both our electronic systems and physical storage have appropriate access controls applied.



The systems we use to process personal data allow us to erase or update personal data at any point in time, where required.



4.7 Accountability principle

We have put in place appropriate technical and organisational measures to meet the requirements of accountability. These include:

the appointment of a Data Protection Officer who has a direct reporting line to the University Secretary;
taking a ‘data protection by design and default’ approach to our activities;
maintaining documentation of our processing activities;
adopting and implementing data protection policies and ensuring we have written contracts in place with our data processors;
implementing appropriate security measures in relation to the personal data we process; and
carrying out data protection impact assessments for our high risk processing and where otherwise deemed helpful.
We regularly review our accountability measures and update or amend them where required.



5. Retention
5.1 The University’s Record Retention Schedules are available here.



Contact
Queries about this policy can be directed to Governance Services at dataprotection@napier.ac.uk

​​Procedure for Breach of Data Security
 

It is important that action is taken as soon as possible following a data incident or breach to try to rectify the situation and mitigate any risks to data subjects. Tell your line manager, Governance Services or Information Services (as appropriate) - DON'T leave it...the sooner we know, the sooner we can do something about it!
 

Data Protection legislation governs the University's obligations with regard to personal data and these include a requirement to keep personal data secure. A breach of data security occurs where unauthorised or unintentional access to personal data is gained, whether this data is held in electronic or manual format. This procedure gives guidance on what to do in the event of such a breach occurring.

 

Immediate actions for an email breach/incident
 

If you send an email or email attachment in error the following are the steps you need to take to rectify it:

Don't Panic! 

Send us the email as an attachment. 
Copy the email from your sent items (click on it and press the Ctrl + C keys) and paste it into a new email as an attachment (click into the body of the new email and press the Ctrl + V keys) and send this email to dataprotection@napier.ac.uk, CC'ing ISServiceDesk@napier.ac.uk, explaining what's happened and asking for the message to be deleted from the servers (if possible).

The email should be titled "Data incident".

It is important that a copy of the original email is provided as an attachment, not forwarded, as the attachment will contain metadata which will assist IS in finding it and removing it.

Please note: Deleting emails from the servers only deals with internal email, NOT external email.

Please attempt to recall the item. 
See Recall or replace a sent email (microsoft.com) for more details.

Governance Services Data Protection team will assess the incident and decide on the course of action to be taken. The Data Protetcion team will provide appropriate template wording​ if you are required to contact any individuals concerned. ​

Please DO NOT forward, reply or "reply all" to the original email sent in error!

Complete the Data Protection Incident / Breach reporting form below and send this to: dataprotection@napier.ac.uk.
 ​DP_Incident_Breach_reporting_form.docx (internal)


Procedure for a Brea​ch of Personal Data Security

Download the Procedure for a Breach of Personal Data Security​. 

  Page last updated 16 August 2023​​​​
​CCTV and Similar Surveillance EquipmentQuis custodiet ipsos custodes?
 

CCTV Code of Practice
The University uses CCTV across its campuses to ensure site security and the safety of staff, students and visitors. Since these systems invariably require the processing of personal data, their use must comply with the Data Protection Legislation. In accordance with guidance from the UK Information Commissioner, the University has adopted the following Code of Practice for the use of CCTV:

 

Download the CCTV Code of Practice in PDF format.

 

 A link to the CCTV section of the University's Data Protection Code of Practice is available here: http://napierstaff.napier.ac.uk/services/governance-compliance/governance/DataProtection/CodeofPractice/Pages/CCTV.aspx 

 

Requests for CCTV images
 

Request by data subjects for CCTV images
Data Protection legislation gives individuals the right of access to their personal data, which includes CCTV images. Information on how to request these images is provided in these Guidance Notes, together with a request form which can be used to make a request.

 

Request by third parties for CCTV images
Requests for images of third parties made by the Police or authorities with prosecuting powers will be dealt with under Data Protection legislation. Any other third party requests will be treated as requests under the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002. Please refer to section 12.3 of the University’s CCTV Code of Practice for further information and guidance.

 

All types of requests for CCTV images should be submitted to:

Facilities Services Manager

Room 6.B.22

Sighthill Campus

Edinburgh

EH11 4BN

 

Individuals Requesting CCTV Footage
As CCTV is very intrusive it is classed as high risk by the UK Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) (further information here: https://ico.org.uk/your-data-matters/cctv/). The reason for this is that operators, as Data Controllers, have no control over what data they are collecting using the cameras e.g. the personal data of numerous individuals, and therefore this is very tightly controlled and restricted, and the University adheres to the Code of Practice mentioned above. Data Protection legislation allows Data Controllers to give individuals access to their own personal data, that is images of themselves only, but it does not allow Controllers to give access to anyone else’s data, unless that processing is covered by either a legal basis or an exemption in the legislation. Whilst there are exemptions for crime and fraud, there are also conditions attached which state that such disclosures are only to be made to “competent authorities” e.g. the Police, and therefore the University would be breaking the law if it allowed individuals to view CCTV footage which contains the images and personal data of the many other individuals whose image/s may be captured in the footage being requested.

Where personal data is requested under data protection legislation and a formal subject access request made, the University is required to obscure/anonymise/pixelate all the other images, including registration plates and identifying features if they constitute the personal data of other individuals - this would be an extremely time consuming and costly exercise for which the University would charge.  

The University is only be able to release time limited full footage to a “competent authority” e.g. the Police, and only after they have submitted an official request form. If you have been the victim of a crime, including a motor vehicle accident/damage, please contact the Police and report it - they will submit their official request to the University for consideration. Further guidance is available here: http://napierstaff.napier.ac.uk/services/governance-compliance/governance/DataProtection/CodeofPractice/Pages/DataSharing02.aspx

 
 
                                                                                                                   Page last updated 2 December 2021

​​

​​Cloud Computing Services
 

The UK Information Commissioner (ICO) has published guidance on cloud computing services which includes this definition: ‘cloud computing services offer organisations access to a range of technologies and service models typically delivered over the internet’. In the accompanying overview, the ICO states:

 

‘Organisations that maintain and manage their own computer infrastructure may be considering a move to cloud computing to take advantage of a range of benefits that may be achieved such as increased security, reliability and resilience for a potentially lower cost.

 

By processing data in the cloud an organisation may encounter risks to data protection that they were previously unaware of. It is important that data controllers take time to understand the data protection risks that cloud computing presents’.

 

Information Services offer internally hosted cloud services which staff and students must consider first before then investigating the transfer of personal data (or confidential / commercially sensitive University information) to an externally hosted service. If it is agreed that the University is unable to provide what is required, any staff member intending to use an external service must:

Refer to the ICO’s guidance and in particular the checklist at s.98 which covers these headings: ‘Risks, Confidentiality, Integrity, Availability & Legal’
Consider and where necessary seek legal advice on the terms of the agreement with the cloud provider
Ensure they can demonstrate that they can satisfy the legal requirements of signing up to the service
Seek the written approval of their line manager
Consult the Information Governance Manager
 

Using Cloud Computing Services for events management or advising students about advertised Cloud Services
In response to the increasing use by staff of external cloud computing services for ticketing/event registration purposes and organisations which are advertising or offering their services to the student community, this specific guidance on these types of services and what you should do with them has been developed.

 

                                                                                                                    Page last updated 28 March 2019
Consent / Disclosure Forms
 

Image of man signing form
Permission to Disclose Personal Data
The Data Protection Legislation allows the University to share a subject's personal data with other areas of the University and third parties, where the subject has given their consent (Please note: consent is not the only legal basis that can be used).  This form should be used to ensure that there is a written record of the subject's informed consent which is then to be retained as specified on the form.  Further guidance on data sharing is available in Section 8 of the Code of Practice and on the Data Sharing documents page.

 

Download the form for Permission to Disclose Personal Data​

 

 

Permission to Disclose Sensitive Personal Data
The requirements for processing sensitive personal data, such as information relating to racial or ethnic origin, health issues or criminal convictions, are more stringent and such data may only be disclosed with the express written consent of the subject. This template consent form should be used when such a disclosure is proposed.

 

Download the form for Permission to Disclose Sensitive Personal Data

 

 

Consent form for student projects, reports and dissertations (except PhDs)
As the University likes to provide exemplars of good work for the benefit of future students, consent to do this must be sought from the relevant students, using this consent form

 

Other considerations in making student work available are:

Can you completely anonymise the work? Students could still be identified from their work even if e.g. their names or other identifiers were removed. Would any of the work have been generated e.g. whilst a student was on placement? If so, is any of this confidential to  the placement provider and/or are they aware of the purposes for which the student’s work would be used?
The consent form refers to a retention period for the piece of work and therefore you should put measures in place to ensure you can comply with this
You should also think about:

Whether any of the work concerns or refers to other living identifiable individuals for which there would be third party data implications
How you make future students aware of copyright/plagiarism issues, including the University’s use of Turnitin for text matching purposes
How you would intend to make the exemplars available
                                                                                                                   Page last reviewed 29 March 2019
​Interaction between Data Protection Legislation and the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002
 Image of clockwords

Data Protection Legislation (DPA 2018 and the GDPR) and Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act (FOISA) are both concerned with information but they have different and at times conflicting purposes. Data Protection legislation protects individuals' rights to privacy and fair processing of their personal data, whilst FOISA provides people with rights of access to the information held by public sector bodies. Data Protection legislation and FOISA therefore operate alongside each other but their interaction could be potentially complex.  This guidance note provides a comparison between the scope of the two acts, and an introduction to their interaction.


Download the Interaction between DPA and FOISA Guidance Note

 

Further information on the interaction between Data Protection legislation and the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act, and with other legislation, can be found in the Data Protection Code of Practice.

 

For further information and guidance on the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act, please see

Governance Services' Freedom of Information site.

​The Data Protection Principles
 

The GDPR sets out seven principles governing the use of personal information. The main purpose of these principles is to protect the interests of the individuals whose personal data is being processed by the University and they apply to everything we do with personal data, unless an exemption applies.

Image of padlock and PC screen

 

These principles ensure that personal information is:

 

1. Processed fairly, lawfully and transparently

 

2.  Collected for specified, explicit and legitimate purposes and not further processed in a manner that is incompatible with these purposes

 

3.  Adequate, relevant and limited

 

4.  Accurate and up to date

 

5.  Kept in a form which permits identification of data subjects for no longer than is necessary

 

6.  Processed in a manner that ensures appropriate security

 

7.  The Controller shall be responsible for and demonstrate accountability

 

The full provisions governing these principles are available in Article 5 of the GDPR

 

Further guidance is available on the UK Information Commissioner's website https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-the-general-data-protection-regulation-gdpr/principles/ 

 

UK Information Commissioner's Guidance on Personal Data
There are several steps to determining whether data (electronic or manual) is personal data for the purposes of Data Protection legislation. Guidance can be found on the UK Information Commissioner's website https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-the-general-data-protection-regulation-gdpr/key-definitions/what-is-personal-data/ 

 

 

Page last reviewed 29 March 2019

Data Sharing 
Further information on data sharing is available in Section 8 of the Data Protection Code of Practice. 

 

Man with oversized envelope
Required Disclosures to Third Parties
The University may be required by legislation, by any rule of law or by the order of a court to disclose an individual's personal data. This document gives a list of examples of third parties who may require disclosure, and the circumstances under which they may do so.  Please note that this list is non-exhaustive.  A checklist for data sharing is available below, and further guidance is given in Section 8 of the University's Data Protection Code of Practice.  If you have any queries, please contact the Information Governance Manager. 

 

  Download the Table of Third Parties who can require disclosure of personal data

 

Environmental Health Officers have powers to obtain information for the purpose of reporting notifiable diseases.  A list of notifiable diseases can be downloaded  here.

 

Permitted Disclosures to Third Parties
The University may receive requests to disclose an individual's personal data, which while not required, may be permitted under Data Protection Legislation. This document gives a list of examples of third parties who may request disclosure of personal data, and the circumstances under which such data may be disclosed.  Please note that this list is non-exhaustive.  A checklist for data sharing is available below, and further guidance is given in Section 8 of the University's Data Protection Code of Practice.  If you have any queries, please contact the Information Governance Manager.

 

 Download the Table of Third parties who may request personal data

 

Internal Data Sharing
 
Please see section 8.4 of the Data Protection Code of Practice
 

External Data Sharing
Sharing personal data externally will require either a contract, data sharing agreement, data processing agreement or a collaboration agreement depending on who the data is being shared with and the purpose. If you do not have any of these in place or it is a new process contact Governance Services for template documents and guidance.
Sharing data without any of the above agreements in place could be, or could lead to, a data breach.
A Privacy Impact Assessment will also be required.
Download the Data Processing Agreement Checklist
Download the Data Sharing Agreement Checklist
Download the Staff checklist for Data Sharing with Third Parties 
 
All Processors contracting with the University to process data on behalf of the University (Controller) whether that is by actual transfer of personal data to them or by the provision of systems or services are subject to the University's Data Processing Terms and Conditions. There are various versions dependent on the situation:

Processors in the UK: ​​DATA_PROCESSING TERMS AND CONDITIONS (in UK)​
            Yellow highlighted sections to be included in Principal Contract/procurement documentation                           (responsibility of colleague outsourcing processing, not Procurement or Governance Services)                                see pages 1 (points A & B), 4 (point 5.7) and 7 (point 14)
​Controllers in the UK and Adequate Countries:  DATA SHARING AGREEMENT GENERAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS
            To be used with the appropriate Data Sharing Agreement
Controllers and Processors outwith the UK and Adequate Countries: INTERNATIONAL DATA TRANSFER AGREEMENT - PART 4 MANDATORY CLAUSES​
             To be used with the completed clauses parts 1 to 3


The signatory for Edinburgh Napier University must have appropriate powers under the University’s Schedule of Delegated Financial Authority: Schedule of Delegated Financial Authority (napier.ac.uk).​​


How to Share Data
SharePoint should be used for sharing personal data, as this is the most secure method, speak to Information Services for guidance on how to do this.
If you are unable to use SharePoint read the Information Security Classification Scheme for other methods and contact Governance Services for guidance before sharing any data.
 
Guidance on the Contractual Requirements for Transferring Personal Data to External Organisations
This guidance note provides general advice on the issues you need to consider when setting up or managing contracts where you intend to transfer personal information from the University to another organisation. This is to ensure that you do so in a way that complies with the Data Protection legislation.


Download the Guidance on the Contractual Requirements for Transferring Personal Data to External Organisations


Download the larger format flowchart from the Guidance Note 

  Destruction of Personal Data
 

Further guidance on the retention and destruction of records containing personal data is available in Section 20 of the Data Protection Code of Practice.

 

 Shredded documents

Guidance on the Safe Disposal of Confidential Waste
The Data Protection Act and the Freedom of Information Act impose specific requirements about the timely and secure disposal of information, both paper and electronic. This guidance note sets out what you need to know.

 

Download the Guidance on Safe Disposal of Confidential Waste

 
Retention and Destruction of Records
The University has to ensure that it has complied with statutory requirements for the retention of records under Data Protection Legislation (GDPR and DPA 2018), Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act or Environmental Information Regulations. Guidance on the retention and then destruction of records is available above in the guidance note on the Safe Disposal of Confidential Waste. When it has been established that a record can be destroyed a record of that destruction, the basis on which this was done (e.g. in accordance with a legal requirement) and the method used must be kept by the area in which the destruction took place. This is the University's form for this purpose.

 

Download the Record Disposal Form

 

The University's Records Retention Schedules provide further information relating to the retention and disposal of records, including personal data.

 

Destruction of Equipment Used to Process Personal Data
 

University provided equipment and BYOD
Equipment which has been used to process personal data must be disposed of in a confidential and secure manner to ensure that the data is completely wiped from the equipment and cannot be restored by any means. Normal file deletion processes are not adequate and over the years there have been many instances where the ICO have investigated breaches which have occurred through the re-sale or re-use of equipment which has not been fully wiped. For University equipment please complete the Redundant Equipment Notification form which can be found on the Procurement intranet pages.

 

If you are using your own equipment (laptops, phones, etc.) for work purposes please ensure that you do not download / process others' personal data (being processed on behalf of the University) onto that equipment. If you need to process personal data using your equipment log in using VPN or Virtual Desktop. If you do download personal data for which the University is the Data Controller then you must ensure that the equipment is securely and fully wiped/destroyed at the end of its life. See the 'Bring Your Own Device' Policy​. Note: Opening an attachment from Outlook when logged on using Office 365 (not through VPN/VD) is likely to store the document directly onto your device.

 

 New General Data Protection Regulation  
 

The new General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) places a number of new and different requirements and responsibilities on organisations. It's been called both ambitious and onerous and at 260 pages long it is certainly a substantial piece of legislation.
 
The implementation phase for the new General Data Protection Regulation started in May 2016, when it came into force, with the Regulation applying fully from the 25 May 2018. The UK Government retained the ability to introduce some derogations for special purposes and these form part of the Data Protection Act 2018(DPA 2018) which also commenced on the 25th of May 2018. The GDPR and the DPA 2018 together form the data protection legislation in the UK.
 
A lot of work has been done across the University, however there are a number of actions that staff should still be taking to ensure compliance. These are summarised below along with some of the key changes that the Regulation brings. Training and briefing sessions began in early 2017 and are still available - you can find details of these here. Please contact Governance Services if you have any queries.
 
Guidance from the regulator, UK Information Commissioner, is available online here.
 
Please let Governance Services know if you would like to be advised of future updates by emailing dataprotection@napier.ac.uk
 
1. Penalties
The maximum fine for the most serious infringements is now €20 million or 4% of annual global turnover. This means that the risks of processing personal data have increased substantially. There is a tiered system of fines and the UK Information Commissioner, who is the regulator, works out the level of penalty based on the severity of the breach, failures to implement technical and organisational measures to comply with the Regulation, the effects on the individuals whose data is involved, etc. There are also fines of up to €10 million or 2% of annual global turnover for failure to report a breach. Any member of staff who suspects that there has been a breach or there is the potential for a breach should contact Governance Services for guidance.
 
2. Definition of personal data
Personal data may now include online identifiers, device identifiers, cookie IDs, IP addresses, location data, etc. and special category (sensitive) personal data will include genetic and biometric data. This means that data which was previously not considered to be personal data, or to fall within the definition of personal data, now needs the additional protections given to personal data applied.
 
ACTION: Identify any information which your school/service area processes which may be encompassed by this expanded definition and ensure appropriate technical and organisational measures are in place to protect it whilst processed and stored within the University and when it is transferred/sent externally and internally.
 

3. Conditions for processing
The legal basis for processing personal data must be determined and documented for each different process/ activity (where personal data is processed). Organisations are required to demonstrate compliance by keeping records documenting all personal data processing activities detailing the purpose of the processing, the lawful basis (conditions/justification) for processing, who the data subjects are, details of any recipients that the data may be shared with, retention policies and security measures taken.
 
ACTION: Please contact Governance Services for advice. Each School/Service Area within the University needs to maintain a schedule of the personal data that they process which includes the information noted above. Governance Services will contact you in due course regarding a Data Protection Audit, which we are required to undertake.
 

4. Privacy Notices
New requirements for 'privacy notices' (also known as 'processing statements' or 'fair processing notices') means extensive information needs to be provided to individuals in clear and plain language, including the information required in 3. above, to demonstrate compliance e.g. the lawful basis for processing, who has access to the data/who it is shared with, purposes for processing, data subjects covered by the notice, retention period for data, security measures applied to the data, data subjects rights and how they can exercise their rights, etc.
 
ACTION: All privacy notices to be reviewed to ensure they are compliant. Please contact Governance Services for further guidance.
 

5. Contracts with Data Processors, including those who have access to personal data e.g. software providers
Legal compliance obligations are now imposed on data processors under the Regulation. Processors must guarantee and demonstrate compliance with the Regulation and sign binding written agreements. Processors are liable for any breach for which they are directly responsible.
 
ACTION: ALL contracts/arrangements with processors must be reviewed to ensure that a Data Sharing Agreement is included and the University is no longer liable for processors' actions.
 

6. Contracts with Data Processors (or other Data Controllers) holding personal data outside the European Economic Area (EEA)
For parties processing personal data in the US - on 1 August 2016 a new scheme, the EU-US Privacy Shield, became operational for companies processing EU/UK personal data in the US. Contracts must be reviewed to ensure that data processors are signed up to the scheme - if not this is a breach of current legislation. For further information see here.
For parties processing personal data outside the EEA, but not in the US or a third country which has been approved as having adequate protections in place - contracts must be reviewed to ensure that they include either a) standard data protection clauses adopted by the UK Information Commissioner, or b) approved binding corporate rules (BCR).
 

ACTION: Review ALL contracts/arrangements with third parties processing personal data outside the EEA or approved countries for which the University is the 'data controller'.
 

7. Privacy Impact Assessments (PIAs) for system design and/or procurement projects (Privacy by Design)
There will be a legal requirement to conduct 'Privacy Impact Assessments'  for all new processes/systems which process personal data. This is to be included as part of the project plan from the start of systems design and/or procurement. Governance Services have templates and guidance available, and will assist with guiding you through the process.
 
ACTION: If you are implementing new systems and processes please ensure that PIAs are considered as standard practice. This is a requirement with immediate effect as the systems are likely to be in place once the Regulation comes into force and will save doing the work retrospectively.
 

8. Consent, where this is required for processing personal data, including e-marketing
The controller must be able to demonstrate that consent has been 'freely given and is specific, informed and unambiguous' and hasn't been withdrawn. It must be as easy to withdraw consent as to give it. Systems should be in place to record consent/withdrawal to ensure that there is an effective audit trail. Comprehensive processing notices, mentioned in 4. above, must be provided to individuals. It is no longer possible to rely on pre-ticked consent boxes, 'opt-outs' or 'soft opt-ins'.
 
ACTION: Check that any e-marketing complies and ensure that where consent is relied on as the basis for processing this too is compliant with the legislation. Start asking for consent NOW, don't leave it until the new Regulation is in force.
 

9. Data Subject Rights - Data Portability
Individuals have the right to receive the personal data that they have provided in a 'commonly used and machine readable format.
 
ACTION: System administrators must ensure that data can be extracted from the systems they administer in a re-useable, open source format.
 

10. Data Subject Rights - Profiling
Individuals have the right not to be subject to a decision based solely on automated processing, including profiling, which has a significant or legal effect on them.
 
There is an obligation to inform individuals specifically about profiling activities and a prohibition on profiling based on sensitive personal data (unless explicit consent has been obtained).
 
The UK Information Commissioner will be providing further guidance in the near future - please let Governance Services know if you would like to be advised of future updates by emailing dataprotection@napier.ac.uk .
 
ACTION: Review any profiling activities to ensure they comply with the new requirements.
 

11. Data Subject Rights - Subject Access Requests and the 'Right to be Forgotten'
Individuals have the right to receive confirmation of whether or not their personal data is being processed, where this is taking place and for what purpose. The timescales for organisations to comply with subject access requests have been reduced to one month. 
 
There are increased rights for erasure of personal data which are not absolute rights and only apply in certain situations. Individuals can also potentially halt the processing of their data by third parties.
 
ACTION: Ensure records management processes and procedures are adequate to enable efficient identification and collection of personal data.
 
Data Protection considerations for Event Management (internal advice)

You will need to provide a secure way for attendees to provide their personal data for the purposes of registering for the event and to manage their personal data for the event thereafter. There are a number of systems that could be used. The University provides MS Forms, but a number of colleagues prefer to use Eventbrite (US data processing) or BookItBee (UK data processing)

If using Eventbrite, there is guidance online for using cloud services: https://napierstaff.napier.ac.uk/services/governance-compliance/governance/DataProtection/Pages/InternetServices.asp

You need to provide a disclaimer to the following effect: 

Please note that by registering for this event via [insert company name] [which will host your data outside the UK (in the USA) you will be supplying your personal data to the company/website and as such you are accepting and consenting to the practices in their Privacy Policy which can be accessed here [insert link]. Edinburgh Napier University is not affiliated with this company/website in any way, is using its services solely for the purposes of facilitating event ticketing and registration and does not accept any responsibility or liability for personal data which you have chosen to provide to such third party sites.’

This should be included on the email invitation and the Eventbrite registration page (just somewhere down the bottom).

You need to be providing your attendees with a Privacy Notice - a template is available on the "Privacy Notice" link in the left hand menu. Mandatory fields are:

1) Data Controller’s details

2) Legal Basis/es

3) Categories of recipients internally and externally (who personal data is shared with)

4) If personal data is transferred outside the UK

5) How long data will be retained or the rationale for retaining data

6) If any automated decision making or profiling is taking place

7) The following link: staff.napier.ac.uk/dpstatements for further information about processing and rights

 

You need to ask attendees to opt-in to the following (where necessary/relevant):

- sharing with external parties e.g. event organisers / sponsors (attendees must be advised of the purposes for this sharing)

- sharing delegate list with other delegates (again advise the purposes e.g. networking)

- receiving marketing / promotion of future events

 

Accessibility/dietary requirements – must be securely collected and stored e.g. in secure system or password protected document and destroyed once the purposes have been fulfilled. Potentially these could be held for up to 3 years in case there is a legal claim relating to equalities or personal injury e.g. issue caused by food.

 

Advise that data may be shared with appropriate colleagues internally.​



If the event will be recorded, filmed or photographed, guidance is available in the University's Data Protection Code of Practice - see the Filming and Photography section: https://staff.napier.ac.uk/services/governance-compliance/governance/DataProtection/CodeofPractice/Pages/PhotographyFilmRecording.aspx 

 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page last updated 1 August 2022​
Frequently Asked Questions
 

 Download the Frequently Asked Questions about Data Protection as a PDF document.

 

1. Can I share personal data within the University?

2. I've received a request from a parent. What can I tell them?

3. I've received a request for student data from a sponsor. What do I do?

4. A police officer is asking me for data about a student. What should I do?

5. I've been asked by an employer to verify a student's award. Can I do that?

6. ENSA / ENSA Advice have phoned me and asked me to confirm some student data. Can I do this?

7. How do I find out what personal data the University holds about me?

8. I have to write a reference. What do I need to consider?

9. Can I see a reference that has been written about me?

10. I have to transfer a batch of student records to a third party. How should I do this?

11. I've been told I need to encrypt personal/ confidential data I am sending out of the University. How do I do this?

12. I want to set up a social networking site for students on my course.  What do I need to think about before I do this?

13. I'm the personal tutor for a student with a disability. As I'd like to help support their academic studies what information can I pass on to others in my School?

14. I've moved offices and don't have enough space for all my records. Can I put them out for the cleaners in a black bin bag?

15. I work from home. What do I need to consider?

16. I’ve had an email from a student asking me to give them copies of the information the University holds about them. What should I do?
 
17. I’ve been asked to delete electronic records containing personal data. What should I consider?
 
18. I would like to delete personal data I’ve stored on my home computer and/or on a PDA/DVD/CD. How should I do this?
 
19. I want to use a cloud computing service for personal data. What do I need to know?
 
20. I have received a Court Order. What do I do with it?
 
 
1. Can I share personal data within the University?
Where there is a strictly need to know reason for disclosing personal data about a student or staff member and there is a reasonable expectation by that individual that their data may be disclosed, then an appropriate sharing of data is permitted. However, you must then consider the method by which you do this and to whom you disclose the data. Any emails should be marked as confidential to alert the recipient and discourage any inappropriate forwarding or copying in to a response.
 
Where the data is considered to be sensitive e.g. it concerns physical or mental health or a disability, then the written consent of the individual is required before any such data can be shared. Further information on data sharing is available in Sections 8.1 and 8.2 of the Code of Practice
 

2. I've received a request from a parent. What can I tell them?
Whilst we may have every sympathy with the parent who may be funding their son or daughter's education and consider that they are sponsoring their education, we are unable to disclose any personal data about their son or daughter without the individual's consent, which should be in writing. This applies to all enquiries about University students irrespective of whether they are under the age of 18.

However, this does not mean that you are unable to respond at all to the parent e.g. with details of our policies and procedures, term dates or how a student may make a complaint. In certain cases it may be acceptable to take a message and pass this on if subsequent checks confirm that the individual is a student at the University. But in doing so you must be careful not to disclose to the enquirer whether or not the individual is a student.
 

3. I've received a request for student data from a sponsor. What do I do?
Some of our students have a formal financial sponsorship arrangement with a company, prospective employer or their home country's Embassy, who may then request details of their sponsored student's attendance and academic progress. You should check with Finance whether there is a formal sponsorship agreement in place for the student. If you're in any doubt then you should contact the student direct and ask them to confirm this and seek their consent to disclose their data.
 
Once you have done your checks or received consent, you should only provide basic limited information about a student's academic progress and attendance; anything else will be regarded as excessive.
If attendance has been interrupted or affected e.g. due to ill health, since this is sensitive personal data we must have the written consent of the student to disclose this and the reasons for the absence to their sponsor.
Further information and guidance on disclosures and the appropriate secure method of doing this are in sections 8.5 and 8.6 of the Code of Practice.
Image of question mark on keyboard
 
 
 
4. A police officer is asking me for data about a student. What should I do?
Under the Data Protection Act 2018, we are permitted but not required to provide personal data to a police officer, or any other officer who is pursuing an investigation for the purposes of criminal or civil proceedings. There is a prescribed University procedure for the handling of any such requests and no disclosures should be made before referring the enquiry to Governance Services, where they will be considered and responded to as appropriate. Further information is given in sections 8.5 and 8.6 of the Code of Practice. 

 
5. I've been asked by an employer to verify a student's award. Can I do that?
The University will often be contacted by employment agencies, prospective employers and other third parties to verify details about a student or to ask if a member of staff is employed at the University. Such requests for information should be treated as a request under the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 and the University will need to consider whether an exemption applies where it relates to personal data. Full guidance on what to do is in section 8.10 of the Code of Practice.
 
Where a student or member of staff claims that they have attained an award and this is proved to be false you should consult the guidance in section 8.11 of the Code of Practice.
 
 
6. ENSA / ENSA Advice have phoned me and asked me to confirm some student data. Can I do this?
The University works closely with Edinburgh Napier Students' Association (ENSA) and ENSA Advice for the benefit of students but staff must remember that ENSA and ENSA Advice are independent of the University. This means that before we disclose any data to them we must be satisfied that the student has given their consent for us to do so. Whilst we would not want to create or add to any academic or pastoral difficulties a student may be experiencing, if you are in any doubt then ask to see a copy of the student's disclosure form or contact the student to seek their consent and/or send them the requested data, which they can then forward as appropriate.
 

7. How do I find out what personal data the University holds about me?
Under Data Protection Legislation, you have a right of access to your personal data. The University has a prescribed procedure for this, information on which is in the guidance on Accessing Personal Information. However, if you would like to see only one or two documents which you believe contain your personal data then you should contact the Information Governance Manager to discuss this.

 
8. I have to write a reference. What do I need to consider?
University staff are routinely asked to provide internal and external references for students and other staff. There are important legal and other considerations to note in doing so and the Guidance Note on References should be consulted before any reference is provided on behalf of the University.
 

9. Can I see a reference that has been written about me?
This will depend on who wrote the reference. If a member of University staff has written a reference about you then this is generally exempt from your right of access under Data Protection legislation. However, if a third party has written a reference which has been received by the University then this is not exempt, but consideration must be given to the data privacy rights of the referee. Further guidance on this is in section 19 of the Code of Practice. 

 
10. I have to transfer a batch of student records to a third party. How should I do this?
Before you send any personal data out of the University whether electronically or in hard copy, you must ensure that you have the relevant University authority to do this i.e. permission from your line manager or you are satisfied that the transfer is in pursuance of an agreement or is required by law. You must then ensure that the data is transferred as securely as possible having considered the level of sensitivity and volume of the data to be sent. You must not:
Assume that documents transferred by electronic means e.g. email, web transfers, File Transfer Protocol are secure
Send any material containing sensitive personal data, or data that if it should be lost is likely to cause damage or distress to the subjects unless it has been encrypted
Download personal data onto physical devices e.g. USB memory sticks, CDs or DVDs unless absolutely necessary; you must then ensure such devices are appropriately encrypted
Send hardcopy data in the mail unless it's marked strictly private and confidential, is addressed to a named individual and sent recorded delivery
 
More guidance is in section 7.5 of the Code of Practice.
 

11. I've been told I need to encrypt personal/ confidential data I am sending out of the University. How do I do this?
Information Services publish guidance on the encryption of confidential or sensitive data and on email encryption. 

 
12. I want to set up a social networking site for students on my course.  What do I need to think about before I do this?
You should check first with Information Services whether this can be hosted internally. If for good reason you decide that what they can offer does not meet your requirements then you need to be aware that there are significant data protection and legal issues which will be relevant if you go to an external service provider. Consult the guidance on Web 2.0 services for further information and in particular the Guidance for Staff.
 
 
13. I'm the personal tutor for a student with a disability. As I'd like to help support their academic studies what information can I pass on to others in my School?
As physical or mental health matters and conditions are sensitive personal data, you must take extra care in the handling of any information which relates to such matters. Normally, you must not disclose any information to any other individuals without the express written consent of the subject, even where this may adversely affect their studies. Further guidance is in section 12 of the Code of Practice.
 
 
14. I've moved offices and don't have enough space for all my records. Can I put them out for the cleaners in a black bin bag?
Under the Data Protection legislation, you should only keep records which contain personal data "for as long as is necessary". How long you should keep such data will depend on what it is and whether there are statutory or professional requirements or best practice considerations for retaining it. The University is developing records retention schedules which you should consult before you dispose of any records. If there isn't a schedule for your area then you should consult section 20 of the Code of Practice or contact Governance Services. 
 
Once you've decided that you can dispose of records which contain personal or confidential data you must ensure this is done securely by placing them in a console bin provided by the University's contractors for the disposal of confidential waste or failing that, by shredding the records. You must not put these records in either the normal waste disposal or recycling bins. Further guidance is available in section 7.9 of the Code of Practice.
 

15. I work from home. What do I need to consider?
All University staff who work from home, either on an occasional or a regular basis, must be aware of their obligations under Data Protection legislation, the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 and the University's Information Security Policies. Security of personal data is paramount when any personal data is accessed remotely or physically removed from University premises and must be ensured whether you are doing administrative, research, academic or other teaching-related work.  Key points are:
If you have to take manual or electronic personal data home, you must ensure you use all appropriate security precautions to guard against inappropriate or unauthorised access
If you download personal information to a removable device e.g. USB stick, CD, DVD or to a University laptop you must encrypt the device or laptop
Don't leave personal information unattended at home, in cars or briefcases, locked or unlocked
You are strongly advised to set up a virtual private network (VPN). You must also keep back-ups of information and consider the most secure way to do this
You must return all personal data to the University for secure disposal
 
Section 7.8 of the Code of Practice gives guidance and further links on what you should do to ensure there are no security breaches.
 
Note that the University can be fined up to €20million for serious breaches of data security.
 
IT publish guidance on Remote Access to the Network which explains how to install and use a virtual private network.

Human Resources' Homeworking Policy, available from the  HR Documents intranet page, addresses the relevant issues in section 9 and Appendix 4.
 
Image of Question Mark made of post-it notes
16. I’ve had an email from a student asking me to give them copies of the information the University holds about them. What should I do?
Where an individual is seeking their personal data, this is called making a subject access request and must be dealt with under Data Protection legislation. You should respond by sending the student a link to the University’s guidance on Access to Personal Information which includes a form and information about the process, verification of identity which may be required and the timescale of one month for our response. The form is intended to assist the individual and the University in specifying the information being sought and where it may be held, but completion of the form is not compulsory as long as the request has been made in writing and identity has been verified where necessary. If the student is looking for one or two specific documents rather than everything the University holds about them, then you should discuss this with your line manager or the Information Governance Manager before invoking the formal process.
 
If they (or any third party) are looking for information about someone else this should be treated as a request under the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 and submitted to foi@napier.ac.uk
 
 
17.  I’ve been asked to delete electronic records containing personal data. What should I consider?
Data Protection legislation does not define ‘delete’ or ‘deletion’ but a plain English interpretation implies ‘destruction’. As with manual data the University holds, it’s important to ensure that electronic data is securely disposed of at the appropriate time to comply with the data protection principle that states that personal data shall not be kept for longer than is necessary. You should consult your area’s records retention schedule (if one has been developed) to check whether the data is due to be deleted and if so whether this is to be done permanently or is to be preserved as archival information. If your area does not have a schedule in place you should consult s.20 of the Data Protection Code of Practice or contact the Governance Adviser (Records Management).
 
The UK Information Commissioner oversees compliance with Data Protection legislation and has published Guidance for organisations on Deleting Personal Data.
 
You should be aware that the contents of an email or email folder are not to be regarded as deleted merely because you have moved it/them to your ‘Deleted Items’ folder. You should ensure you delete relevant records permanently from this folder and similarly, you should empty your desktop ‘Recycle Bin’ for other electronic records which you’ve deleted.
 
 
18. I would like to delete personal data I’ve stored on my home computer and/or on a PDA/DVD/CD. How should I do this?
The UK Information Commissioner, who oversees compliance with Data Protection legislation, has issued guidance for individuals on Deleting your data from computers, laptops and other devices.
 
 
19. I want to use a cloud computing service for personal data. What do I need to know?
Cloud computing services provide data processing and storage facilities which are external to the University. Some of these services may be hosted overseas in countries which do not have the same privacy protections required by the GDPR and DPA 2018. Staff must be aware therefore that breaches of Data Protection legislation could arise from using these services, unless there is a robust data sharing agreement in place.
 
The University already publishes comprehensive guidance on the use of Cloud Computing Services which must be consulted and also this guidance on Using Cloud Computing Services for events management or advising students about advertised Cloud Services.
 
 
20. I have received a Court Order. What do I do with it?
The University receives a number of court orders in the course of a year, many of which are for the production of documents the University may hold within 7 days of the order being served. The purpose of this guidance is to highlight the key points which all University staff must be aware of in ensuring a Court Order is dealt with timeously and correctly.

University Information Governance Group
 

The purpose of the University Information Governance Group (UIGG) is to ensure that the University Computer keyboardmaintains compliance with its statutory obligations under the GDPR, the Data Protection Act 2018, Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002, Environmental Information (Scotland) Regulations 2004, and Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC Directive) Regulations 2003 and any other related information management legislation, and develops related best practice guidance.

 

Remit
Download the remit of the University Information Governance Group.

 

Minutes
Open minutes of the UIGG will be made available following each meeting and can be accessed here.

 

Information Governance Champions 
 

The purpose of the Information Governance Champions network  is to identify and promote good information governance practice and to help ensure the University's compliance with information governance legislation.

 

Find your Information Governance Champion
Please click here​ for the current list of IG Champions.​



We need representatives from each School/Service Area, to nominate a champion in your area please email dataprotection@napier.ac.uk or contact Governance Services for more information.



Remit
Download the remit of the Information Governance Champions.

 

​International Transfers of Personal Data
 

A passport to IndiaFurther guidance on international transfers of personal data is available in Section 11 of the Data Protection Code of Practice.

 

Checklist and Exceptions to Prohibition for Transfers to Non-EEA Countries
University staff should ensure that there are clear and documented procedures and administrative responsibilities for the transfer of personal data to non-EEA countries. In addition, Data Protection Legislation provides a number of exceptions to the prohibition on the transfer of the personal data in question.  The factors which University staff should consider if a transfer of personal data is proposed are in this checklist.

 

  Download the Checklist and Guidance on exceptions for transfers to Non-EEA countries

 

EU-US Privacy Shield (Safe Harbour replacement)
The EU-US Privacy Shield became fully operational from 1 August 2016. Companies can sign up to the Privacy Shield with the U.S. Department of Commerce who will then verify that their privacy policies comply with the high data protection standards required by the Privacy Shield.

 

Important information about the transfer of personal data to the United States
From 1 August 2016 the US Safe Harbour Scheme was replaced by the EU-US Privacy Shield. Information about the scheme can be found on the ICO's website and the European Commission's website, which gives the following overview:

 

"What is the Privacy Shield?

The Privacy Shield allows personal data to be transferred from the EU to a company in the United States, provided that the company there processes (e.g. uses, stores and further transfers) your personal data according to a strong set of data protection rules and safeguards. The protection given to your data applies regardless of whether you are an EU citizen or not.  

 

How does the Privacy Shield work?

To transfer personal data from the EU to the U.S. different tools are available such as contractual clauses, binding corporate rules and the Privacy Shield. If the Privacy Shield is used, U.S. companies must first sign up to this framework with the U.S. Department of Commerce. The obligation applying to companies under the Privacy Shield are contained in the "Privacy Principles". This Department is responsible for managing and administering the Privacy Shield and ensuring that companies live up to their commitments. In order to be able to certify, companies must have a privacy policy in line with the Privacy Principles. They must renew their "membership" to the Privacy Shield on an annual basis. If they do not, they can no longer receive and use personal data from the EU under that framework.

 

If you want to know if a company in the U.S. is part of the Privacy Shield you can check the Privacy Shield List on the website of the Department of Commerce (https://www.privacyshield.gov/welcome). This list will give you details of all the companies taking part in the Privacy Shield, the kind of personal data they use, and the kind of services they offer. You can also find a list of the companies that are no longer part of the Privacy Shield."

The following links provide current guidance:

European Commission news article 01/08/2016

European Commission Press Release 12/07/2016

FAQs

Any staff who have concerns about current agreements or are contemplating future ones should contact Governance Services.

​​Internet, Online, AI/Large Language Models (LLMs) and Web 2.0 Services
 

Further guidance on the data protection issues relating to the internet, online and Web 2.0 services is available in

Section 9 of the Data Protection Code of Practice.

 
​Interim Guidance for Staff on the Responsible Use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) Large Language Models (LLMs) to Protect Personal and Corporate Information (e.g. Bing Chat Enterprise1, ChatGPT, GPT-4, Bard, etc.)
​

Background 
Generative and publicly available AI models are creating excellent opportunities to enhance education and research, and opportunities to improve service delivery, effectiveness and efficiency.  These also bring challenges in terms of ethics, bias, academic integrity, privacy and the protection of corporate information. 
The following is presented as initial guidance to help ensure colleagues use this technology responsibly and mitigate the risks of disclosing personal data or business-sensitive information while using AI models, ensuring we preserve the integrity and confidentiality of our corporate information and meet our legal obligations under the UK GDPR and the Data Protection Act 2018.

Scope
This guidance applies to all employees and contractors who process University information.  It will continue to be reviewed and updated as the University’s overarching policy and strategy for the use of AI across its activities is developed. 

Key Points
Do not input personal data into an AI model.
Do not input the University’s corporate information (i.e. proprietary or confidential information which is not publicly available) into an AI model. 
​​Do not use AI models to make decisions about individuals.  Under the UK GDPR individuals have the right not to be subject to a decision based solely on automatic processing.
​
​Recommended Practices
Interacting with an AI Large Language Model typically requires the submission of text, which may be a question or statement, which is then used by the model to generate text or other media output. Data in prompts submitted to models for processing may be stored and used for other purposes, including the training of AI models, by the organisations hosting the LLMs. It is therefore vital to craft prompts carefully by providing sufficient context to enable the model to generate a helpful response without disclosing personal or corporate information. 

Here are some guidelines to bear in mind while constructing prompts:​

Anonymise information: Ensure that data within prompts is anonymised. In other words, do not use any direct identifiers or details which could indirectly identify individuals within prompts. An indirect identifier is information which could identify an individual if combined with other information reasonably available to the processor of the data, including information obtainable from other sources (e.g. published online, or from another organisation). 
​
Generalise prompts: Frame prompts in a general way, where possible, without specifying particular details. If, for example, you are looking for inspiration relating to a strategy for “Edinburgh Napier University”, you could ask for strategies which might be useful for a “UK Higher Education Institution”. As with hypothetical scenarios, this reduces the risk of disclosing identifiable or otherwise sensitive information.
​
Keep prompts hypothetical: Rather than submitting genuine scenarios, where possible use hypothetical scenarios with the same or a similar context. For example, if as a lecturer you were using an LLM to assist with writing a business proposal to develop a specialised new micro credential course, you could avoid mentioning the name of the university, the title of the proposed course, and the target market. Additionally, instead of submitting something like “I am developing a course along the following lines…”, consider how the issues you are interested in can be explored more obliquely. For example, you could try something like “If a course with features X were to be developed at a UK University, targeting a market with features Y…”, taking care not to over-specify X or Y. Drafting your question separately, before pasting into a chat interface, may help, and you may also find it helpful to consult with colleagues before submitting the prompt. With a careful approach like this you may receive excellent LLM output, applicable to the real-world scenario in question, without divulging potentially identifying or otherwise sensitive information. 
​
​Contextualise with care: The conversational nature of services like ChatGPT and Google Bard means that contextual information held by hosting organisations, and thus potentially available for other uses like training AI models, may “snowball” over the course of one or more chats. This can increase the risk of disclosing indirect identifiers, even if direct identifiers are avoided, and can also increase the risk of disclosing sensitive corporate information. Keep track of what has been provided to an AI model, taking this into account before submitting new prompts. 
​
Limit prompt detail: As a general rule, limit the detail within prompts submitted to an LLM. As with contextual information, please take care not to over-specify what is requested from the model as this may inadvertently disclose personal or otherwise sensitive data.
​
Do not use the technology to make decisions about individuals: Article 22 of the UK GDPR states that a “data subject shall have the right not to be subject to a decision based solely on automated processing, including profiling, which produces legal effects concerning him or her or similarly significantly affects him or her”. Colleagues should also avoid using the technology to contribute to decisions about individuals unless a Privacy Impact Assessment has been completed and there is a robust process in place approved by the appropriate Dean/Director.
​
Verify outputs: However plausible any LLM outputs are, always question their accuracy and truthfulness. Check this output independently and ensure that you are able to defend the veracity of any information relied on with reference to more authoritative sources.  

​1 Microsoft has implemented security features that make Bing Chat Enterprise a relatively lower risk option than some other web-based services (e.g. there is no chat history, and neither prompts nor responses will be used to train models).

​​A PDF version of this guidance is available here: AI Guidance on Protection of Personal and Corporate Information.pdf​​
​

Web 2.0 and Externally Hosted Services Guidance for Staff
Web 2.0 Services such as wikis, blogs and social networking sites provide staff and students with valuable educational opportunities to create and sha​re content and work online together. However, staff must be aware of the important legal and other implications that arise if they plan to use Web 2.0 services as part of module activities and communicate these effectively Image of computer and userto students and other users. This guidance aims to assist staff in making the most of Web 2.0 Services and other externally hosted services for learning, teaching and assessment purposes.

 

Download Web 2.0 Services and Other Externally Hosted Services - Guidance for Staff in Learning and Teaching​  
 
  

Web 2.0 Guidance for Students
This guidance is intended to make students aware of the relevant legal issues involved with the internet, Web 2.0 and other externally hosted services (e.g. Facebook, Twitter) and to encourage students to use these services in a safe, responsible and acceptable manner. It also offers guidance on how to protect themselves from electronic abuse or harassment by fellow students or others.

 

 Download Internet, Web 2.0 and Externally Hosted Services - Guidance for Students: How to be Webwise.

Oaths of Confidentiality
  

If you receive an error message when opening the PDFs below, please switch to another browser. Currently, Chrome seems to be having issues opening these PDFs, but Internet Explorer/Microsoft Edge is fine.



Oath of Confidentiality for Associate Staff, Temporary Staff and Employed Students
On joining Edinburgh Napier University, all Associate Staff, temporary staff (including and students who are employed) must be directed to the University's Data Protection Policy on the Governance intranet pages, be advised about relevant advice and guidance in the University’s Code of Practice, and sign an oath of confidentiality in relation to personal data and commercially sensitive or confidential data to which they will have access in the course of their work. This form should be retained by the supervising, employing or sponsoring area for a period of 6 years from the date on which the association or temporary employment ceases.

 

Download the Oath of Confidentiality for Associate Staff, Temporary Staff and Employed Students

 

 

Oath of Confidentiality for Contractors
Staff responsible for securing the services of contractors are required to ensure that contractors are given a copy of the University's data protection leaflet, be advised about relevant advice and guidance in the University’s Code of Practice, and sign an oath of confidentiality in relation to personal data to which they will have access in the course of their work.  This form should be retained by the area instructing the services for a period of 6 years from the date on which the agreement is concluded.

 

Download the Oath of Confidentiality for Contractors

 

 

Oath of Confidentiality for Staff or Students with Access to SITS
Where students, or staff who are also students, process personal data for the University's purposes, the relevant staff must ensure that: written authority from the relevant Head of School or Service has been sought before a current, employed student is given access to the Student Record System; they have been advised about relevant advice and guidance in the University’s Code of Practice; and that this oath of confidentiality has been signed.

 

Download the Oath of Confidentiality for Staff or Students with Access to SITS

 

 

Oath of Confidentiality for Research Students
All students conducting research at Edinburgh Napier University which involves processing personal data must be given a copy of the University's data protection leaflet, be advised about relevant advice and guidance in the University’s Code of Practice, and sign an oath of confidentiality in relation to personal data to which they will have access in the course of their studies.  This form should be retained by the area in which the research is being conducted for the period end of studies with the University plus 6 years.

 

Download the Oath of Confidentiality Form for Research Students

 

 

Oaths of Confidentiality for Unpaid Student Worker/ School Pupil Placement
On joining Edinburgh Napier University, all unpaid workers or school pupils on placement must be given a copy of the University's data protection leaflet, be advised about relevant advice and guidance in the University’s Code of Practice, and sign the relevant oath of confidentiality in relation to personal data to which they will have access in the course of their work.  This form should be retained by the placement area for a period of 6 years from the date on which the placement ceases.

 

Download the Oath of Confidentiality form for an Unpaid Student Worker

Download the Oath of Confidentiality for a School Pupil Placement

 

System User Access Form
Prior to giving colleagues access to systems which process personal data Systems Administrators must request that they complete a System User Access Form. This generic form can be tailored to the system specific requirements.

                                                                                                                       Page last updated 29 March 2019​​​


Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC Directive) Regulations 2003 (PECR 2003)
The Privacy and Electronic Communications Regulations were originally introduced in 2003 to regulate direct marketing activities by electronic means (by telephone, fax, email or other electronic methods). They also regulate the security and confidentiality of such communications, with rules governing the use of cookies and 'spyware'. The Regulations complement Data Protection Legislation in the regulation of organisations' use of personal data and in ensuring appropriate safeguards for individuals' rights and privacy. The Regulations apply different rules to individual subscribers and corporate subscribers, although some rules apply to both. Where personal data is used Data Protection legislation always applies and the Regulations cannot be used to avoid the requirements of Data Protection legislation.

 

The European Directive on which the Regulations are based was revised in 2011. As a result the existing Regulations in the UK were amended by the Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC Directive) (Amendment) Regulations 2011. The most recent changes were made in January 2019.

 

Many of the 2003 Regulations have stayed the same, but some important changes were made, which included:

rules for websites using cookies and similar technologies (see section 9 of the Code of Practice);
new powers for the UK Information Commissioner (ICO) to serve a monetary penalty on an organisation when very serious breaches of the Regulations occur; and
new powers for the ICO to investigate breaches of the Regulations by obtaining information from certain third party organisations.
 

Most of the rules on marketing by live phone call, automated phone call, fax, email and text message stayed the same.

 

'Direct marketing' means 'the communication (by whatever means) of any advertising or marketing material which is directed to particular individuals' (s.122 of the DPA 2018). The ICO considers "'direct marketing' as covering a wide range of activities which will apply not just to the offer for sale of goods or services, but also to the promotion of an organisation's aims and ideals." - this covers all advertising or promotional material, including that promoting the aims or ideals of not-for-profit organisations – for example, it covers a charity campaigning for support or funds. If your communication is designed to change behaviour then it is likely to be considered as marketing or promotional material.

 

Where the University wishes to communicate via electronic means with individuals, such as prospective students (e.g.
marketing the University) or alumni (e.g. fundraising) they must comply with the following rules in order to use these media for marketing communications to individual subscribers:

live voice telephone calls: the University must honour individuals' "Do not Call" requests, you must not make unsolicited live calls to:anyone who has told you they don’t want your calls; or any number registered with the TPS or CTPS, unless the person has specifically consented to your call
e-mail/SMS: You must not send marketing emails or texts to individuals without specific consent. There is a limited exception for your own previous customers, often called the ‘soft opt-in’. You can send marketing emails or texts to companies. However, it is good practice to keep a ‘do not email or text’ list of any companies that object.
The University must have the opt-in consent of subscribers OR meet the soft-opt-in test: he University must have the opt-in consent of subscribers OR meet the soft-opt-in test:
Contact details are obtained during negotiation or sale of goods or services to the recipient AND
marketing is conducted by the same entity as previous dealings with the individual AND
marketing relates to "similar products and services" AND
an opt-out mechanism is provided at the point of data collection and is provided with each new communication.
automated calling systems: the University must have prior consent. You must not make an automated marketing call – that is, a call made by an automated dialling system that plays a recorded message – unless the person has specifically consented to receive this type of call from you. General consent for marketing, or even consent for live calls, is not enough – it must specifically cover automated calls
faxes: the University must have prior consent, you must not send marketing faxes to individuals or to any number listed on the Fax Preference Service (FPS), unless they have specifically consented to your faxes. You can send marketing faxes to companies that are not listed on the FPS.
 

The ICO has published this updated ‘plain language’ guidance on PECRs.

and this updated guide to Electronic and Telephone Marketing.

 

Enforcement of PECRs
The Privacy and Electronic Communications Regulations are enforced by the ICO, who may impose a civil monetary penalty of up to a maximum of £500K if a business is found to have committed a very serious breach of the Regulations. In other cases an Information Notice requesting further information or an Enforcement Notice will be issued and a fine may be imposed for breach of an Enforcement Notice.

 

3.5 The Electronic Commerce (EC Directive) Regulations 2002
The e-Commerce Regulations 2002 include a requirement that the recipient of an e-Commerce service, including direct marketing, must be provided, in a form and manner that is easily, directly and permanently accessible, with certain information including:

The name of the service provider i.e. the University 

The geographic address at which the service provider is established

The details of the service provider, including staff email address, which make it possible to contact him rapidly and communicate with him in a direct and effective manner

The purpose of this requirement is to ensure that individuals are able to effectively utilise their consumer protection and other rights, including those granted under Data Protection Legislation and PECR 2003 as amended in 2011, by providing them with the necessary information about whom to enforce those rights. The Regulations do not prescribe how the requirement to make information "easily, directly and permanently accessible" should be met.

It is important that colleagues sending communications covered by PECR retain a record of consent to receive communications and a record of requests to unsubscribe from the communications (to ensure individuals are not inadvertently sent communications after requesting that they stop).

                                                                                                                  Page last updated 7 October 2019


Privacy Impact Assessments
 

A Privacy Impact Assessment is a risk assessment which is conducted for any processing (manual or electronic) of personal data to identify where risks are present and put measures in place to mitigate those ri​sks, thereby reducing the risk of data breach/es happening.

 

Privacy Impact Assessments are required in the following circumstances:

1) New projects or proprosed processing (manual and/or electronic) which will result in a system which processes personal data

2) Reviews, changes or updates to any "systems" or procedures (manual or electronic) where personal data is being processed

3) Existing processes which haven't had a privacy impact assessment conducted

 

Any/all procedures (tasks/activities) or systems which process personal data should already have written instructions which include a privacy risk assessment or have been subject to a data protection audit. These must be regularly reviewed to ensure they are still operationally correct.

 

If in doubt please contact Governance Services at dataprotection@napier ac.uk 

 

To paraphrase Article 25: The nature, scope, context and purposes of the personal data processing, along with the risks of a data breach occuring must be considered prior to (ideally during system design), and during processing e.g. processes/systems already in place.

Article 35 sets out the detail of the requirements for a Privacy Impact Assessment.

 

Question mark made of post-it notes

Guidance on Privacy Impact Assessments
When University staff are considering adopting new administrative systems and other processes with possible privacy implications, or updating existing systems or processes, they are required (by law) to undertake a Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA) in the early stages of a project to identify any potential privacy issues and risks, and seek ways to avoid, minimise or at least improve privacy concerns.

 

When must you undertake a PIA?

- If starting a new project which will result in a system or process (manual or electronic or electronic) which processes personal data

- If making substantial changes to a system (manual or electronic or both) which processes personal data and there is no existing PIA for the process/system (if a PIA exists it can be updated rather than initiated)

 

examples where PIAs have been done include:

- Student Learning Profile process: Information about students who require adjustments to learning/teaching materials/delivery, exams, etc. is passed from the Student Wellbeing and Inclusion team to appropriate contacts within the Schools

- Panopto Lecture Capture software for recording lectures

- Graduate Apprenticeship data sharing with other organisations involved in the course provision

- Childcare and discretionary funding procedures

- External examiner appointment and procedures for marking and mark collection/dissemination

 

Guidance on privacy impact assessments, which includes advice on when a PIA should be carried out, who should be involved and what form the process might take, is available in Section 10 of the Data Protection Code of Practice.

 

For assistance and guidance on conducting a PIA and  for us to provide you with the appropriate template for your specific processing or project please contact the University's Information Governance team at dataprotection@napier.ac.uk
 

 

                                                                                                                    Page last reviewed 22 June 2021

​ ​​​​​​​​


Data Protection Privacy Notice & HESA Notices
  

Edinburgh Napier University is a data controller for the purposes of UK data protection legislation (“the legislation”), that is, the UK Data Protection Act 2018 (“DPA 2018”) and the General Data Protection Regulation: EU 2016-679 (“GDPR”) as amended by “EU Exit” Regulations 2019 and now known as the UK GDPR, and processes personal data strictly in line with the legislation and its notification to the UK Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) who regulate the legislation in the UK. The University is committed to compliance with the legislation and protecting all personal data it processes.



Below are the University's main overarching Privacy Notices, followed by links to the HESA notices and the University's layered Privacy Notices specific to certain processes. 



Please note that the University is transitioning to the use of the term "trusted contact/s" rather than "next-of-kin" or "emergency contact/s" which were used previously. If you see the terms "next-of-kin" or "emergency contact/s", please read these as "trusted contacts", while we update our guidance and privacy notices.


 

Image of a folder marked confidential

 Student Recruitment Privacy Notice
Download the Student Recruitment Privacy Notice​


 

Student Applicant Privacy Notice
Download the Applicant Privacy Notice

 
Student Privacy Notice
Download the Student Privacy Notice

 
Staff Privacy Notice
Download the Staff Privacy Notice

 
Court Member Privacy Notice
Court_Members_Privacy_Notice.pdfDownload the Court Members Privacy Notice

 
Alumni Privacy Notice
 The Privacy Notice for Alumni can be found online using the following link:Alumni Privacy Notice

 

Research Privacy Notice (Generic)
This privacy notice provides some general information about processing taking place for a wide variety of research projects. If you are a participant in a research project you will be provided with a specific privacy notice along with the participant information.

Download the Generic Research Privacy Notice​ 

  

Image of a clipboard and penHigher Education Statistics Agency (HESA) Data Protection Notices
The University is legally required to send some information to the Higher Education Statistics Agency (HESA). The links below explain how HESA will use the information.

 

View the HESA Student Collection Notice

 

View the HESA Staff Collection Notice

 

View the HESA Destinations of Leavers from HE (DLHE) Collection Notice (for leavers up to the end of 2016/17)

 

View the HESA Graduate Outcomes survey information (for leavers from 2017/18 onwards)

 

View the Edinburgh Napier University Graduate Outcomes Privacy Notice and information here: https://www.napier.ac.uk/alumni/graduate-outcomes​ 

 

Additional 'Layered' Privacy Notices
Associate Staff - HR Process
Cashless Catering EPOS 
Colleague Engagement Survey​​
Commercial Courses Professional Associates
Commercial Courses Recruitment
Commercial Courses​
Complaints
Counselling Service
COVID Reset Mentoring Scheme​
​Culture, Employment and Development in Academic Research Survey (CEDARS)​
Data Lab Scholarship
Data Subject Rights Request
Disability and Inclusion
Disability and Inclusion - Student Engagement Project
Edinburgh College Flexible Workforce Development Fund Courses
[EN]gage Membership
ENroute HEA Enrolment
ENroute HEA Membership
ENSA Student Representatives
ePay Online Payment System
Equate Scot​lan​d​​
Equate Scotland eCommunications
​Equate ​Scotland Event Registration and Attendance Data​
Equate Scotland Photography, Film/Video and Quotes​
Graduate Apprentice Programme
Graduation Survey
Graduations (in Edinburgh)
Graduations (Virtual)​
Graduations (Overseas)
Higher Education Achievement Report (HEAR) - Gradintelligence
Image Library
InPlace - Nursing Student Placements Administration System
International Programmes
IS_Unidesk_Customer_Thermometer_Survey.pdfIS Unidesk Customer Thermometer Survey​
Job Alerts
Joint Supervision Projects​
Junior Music Students
​Keep On Track​
LibCal
Library Membership - External Members
Library Membership - Staff and Students
Mentoring_Programme_(Employee)_MentorNet​
Millport Field Trips​
Occupational Health Referrals and Assessments​
Online Store Privacy Noti​ce​
PG Dip Midwifery & Masters of Midwifery (Shortened)​​
PG Teacher Education Programmes (Placements)
Poppulo_privacy_notice.pdfPoppulo
Postgraduate Taught Experience and Postgraduate Research Experience Surveys
Principal's Office External Communications
Procurement Request Process
​Project VISION Sensor Technology Privacy Notice​
QS Global Academic Survey
REF Data Collection
RIE NHS Assure Research Commissioning Services Events​
SAFA Privacy Notice​
School of Applied Sciences Students' Health Data
School of Health and Social Care - 'Near Me' Videoconferencing​
School of Health and Social Care - Student Practice Learning Evaluation
Scottish Modern Universities Northern Ireland Tour
Self-Defence Class Registration
Simulated Patient Volunteer Programme
Special Collections​
Staff Recruitment
Staff Recruitment Satisfaction Survey
Student Accommodation
Student Accommodation Applicants Criminal Convictions
Student Accommodation Guarantors 
Student Card Production and Distribution
Student Funding
Student Futures​
Student Global Mobility (Study or Traineeship)
Student Mobility Survey Privacy Notice​
Student Open Days
Student Recruitment Privacy Notice for College Board personal data
Student Wellbeing and Inclusion Survey
Student Work Placements
Summer Accommodation
Talent Attraction
Transport Research Institute Survey
Travel Risk Assessment
Upskilling Short Courses​
Web Filter
Wellbeing and Inclusion Department​
Widening Access Project Participation Full Privacy Notice
Widening Access Project Participation Under-18s Privacy Notice​​
Widening Participation Networking Group 
Winning Students​

Template Privacy Notice (for internal staff use)
Where 'layered' Privacy Notices are required in addition to the main Privacy ​Notices detailed above colleagues are requested to contact dataprotection@napier.ac.uk) for a template.


Guidance on References
Scorecards 

Further guidance on references is available in Section 19 of the Data Protection Code of Practice.


Guidance Note on References
Guidance on providing references is now given by HR - please see their intranet page here: Policy (napier.ac.uk)​

                                                                                                                     Page last updated 19/01/2022
Processing Data for Research Purposes

Further guidance on the use of personal data in research is available in Section 6 of the Data Protection Code of Practice.

Page Contents
​1) Data Protection: Researchers' Guidance and forms
2) Oath of Confidentiality for Research Students
3) Standard Descriptions of Categories of Personal Data
4) Data Protection Legal Bases v Research Ethics Consent
5) Processing Personal Data in the Public Domain
6) Using Social Media for Research
7) Using Others' Photos for Research
8) Basic Pseudonymisation Guidance
9) Providing Participants with a Secure Method of Sending Their Personal Data to the Researcher/s
10) Undergraduate and Taught Postgraduate Research / Dissertations
​11) Transcription
12) Briefing Sessions

Sports Science Researcher1) Data Protection: Researchers' Guidanc​e and forms


Respect for confidentiality is essential to maintain trust between the public and those engaged in research.  All researchers intending to use personal data must comply with the requirements of data protection legislation, the University's Data Protection Code of Practice and any associated guidance. This guidance covers the data protection issues researchers should take into account and the actions to take to be compliant.

 

Whilst the University provides a generic Privacy Notice for Research this does not take the place of the project specific Privacy Notice that must be provided to participants.

 

Please read the guidance and complete the Researcher's Checklist, Oath of Confidentiality (if you are not an employed researcher who has signed an employment contract e.g. research postgraduate) and Privacy Notice. The checklist and oath are required internally by the supervisor, PI and/or Ethics Committee. The Privacy Notice must be provided to participants along with their participant information.

Research and Data Protection guidance

Please complete the Researcher's Data Protection Compliance Checklist (Pre-PIA)​​ and send to dataprotection@napier.ac.uk. If you have any queries whilst you are completing it please re-read the guidance document above or contact dataprotection@napier.ac.uk.

We have also provided a template Privacy Notice for you to update and provide to your participants. The Information Governance team don't need to see or check this, but please think about how this reads to your participants and word it accordingly: 

​Research Privacy Notice template​

​​ 

Further guidance is available from JISC https://www.jisc.ac.uk/guides/rdm-toolkit​ 

The European Commission's guidance on Ethics and Data Protection is available here: http://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/data/ref/h2020/grants_manual/hi/ethics/h2020_hi_ethics-data-protection_en.pdf​

 

2) Oath of Confidentiality for Research Students
All students conducting research at Edinburgh Napier University which involves processing personal data must directed to these intranet pages (Data Protection for Research), and sign an oath of confidentiality in relation to personal data to which they will have access in the course of their studies.  This form should be retained by the area in which the research is being conducted for the period end of studies with the University plus 6 years.

 

Download the Oath of Confidentiality Form for Research Students

 

If PG Research students are processing any categories of personal data they are required to complete an Oath of Confidentiality. 



3) Standard Descriptions of Categories of Personal Data
The following is a list of standard descriptions of categories of personal data examples:

☐ Personal details, including any information that identiﬁes the data subject and their personal characteristics, including: name, address, contact details, age, date of birth, sex, and physical description.

☐ Personal details issued as an identifier by a public authority, including passport details, national insurance numbers, identity card numbers, driving licence details.

☐ Family, lifestyle and social circumstances, including any information relating to the family of the data subject and the data subject’s lifestyle and social circumstances, including current marriage and partnerships, marital history, details of family and other household members, habits, housing, travel details, leisure activities, and membership of charitable or voluntary organisations.

☐ Education and training details, including information which relates to the education and any professional training of the data subject, including academic records, qualiﬁcations, skills, training records, professional expertise, student and pupil records.

☐ Employment details, including information relating to the employment of the data subject, including employment and career history, recruitment and termination details, attendance records, health and safety records, performance appraisals, training records, and security records.

☐ Financial details, including information relating to the ﬁnancial affairs of the data subject, including income, salary, assets and investments, payments, creditworthiness, loans, beneﬁts, grants, insurance details, and pension information.

☐ Goods or services provided and related information, including details of the goods or services supplied, licences issued, and contracts.

etc.     

 

Special category (sensitive) personal data concerns, reveals or is about:

☐ racial or ethnic origin

☐ political opinions

☐ religious or philosophical beliefs

☐ trade union membership

☐ genetic data

☐ biometric data (if used to identify a natural person)

☐ health

☐ sex life or sexual orientation

☐ criminal convictions and offences

☐ none of the above

 

4) Data Protection Legal Bases v Research Ethics Consent


Data Protection legal bases are distinct from research ethics consent in that the University has the legal power by law (statutory order) to conduct research and can therefore process personal data without specifically asking for consent, however research consent is required to ensure that the research is conducted in an ethical way and participants understand and agree to what is being asked of them or, you could say it is the accepted mechanism to ensure that research is conducted in an ethical way which upholds the rights of the participants e.g. to make an informed decision.

 There are some useful articles online:

Preparation for the implementation of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR): understanding the current legal situation (ukri.org)

"Informed, voluntary and fair consent is the cornerstone of ethical research involving people. It is a mechanism, to ensure the rights of individual participants can be respected. It is through the consent process that research participants can understand what taking part in a specific study will mean for them, so they can make an informed choice and feel able to express their wishes." 

GDPR Brief: What is the difference between research ethics consent and data protection consent? (ga4gh.org)


5) Processing Personal Data in the Public Domain
Processing information available in the public domain depends on purposes, the processing being done and legal basis used, etc. The ICO has guidance here: https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-data-protection/guide-to-the-general-data-protection-regulation-gdpr/the-right-to-be-informed/what-common-issues-might-come-up-in-practice/#id3 . Social media sites also have their own requirements set out in their Ts & Cs which must be complied with. Of course, processing for research can take place, but researchers must give due consideration to the requirements of the legislation and rights of participants, which is done through the University’s governance and ethics processes. There’s no problem with processing personal data as long as due regard is taken for the legislation and appropriate safeguards are put in place to protect participants' rights, the security of the personal data e.g. encrypted at all times and data minimisation is observed throughout the project e,g, collect only what is needed and pseudonymise personal data as early as possible.​

Where you are recruiting participants using information which is publicly available, please advise them where you got their information from and your justification for using it for your project e.g. their connection to the topic, subject matter expert, etc.. Where personal data is collected from publicly available resources there is a higher risk of the individuals complaining about the use of their data, so please ensure that you don’t contact anyone who would consider the use of their data to be unreasonable and unfair.



6) Using Social Media for Research


LinkedIn 
If you are advertising your research on a LinkedIn 'message board' and providing links in there to participant information and the privacy notice, this is fine, as long as it complies with the rules for that group or channel (if in doubt contact the group/channel administrator to ask permission). It is advisable to use NoviSurvey to give potential participants a secure method of signing up to your study. You can use NoviSurvey as a means of providing participant information, the privacy notice, collecting consent, and, of course, disseminating your questionnaire/survey. Depending on the research project this could potentially all be done at the same time. Where it is not necessary to collect personal data you can use NoviSurvey in anonymous mode and collect consent via a 'tick box' without requesting name, contact details, etc. which would identify the participant.

LinkedIn doesn’t have any guidance specifically for research participant recruitment via their messaging service (only for their own research). If you message members you must make information about the research project (including privacy notice information) available elsewhere online and provide a link in your intro message so that they can review it before making their decision whether or not to participate. If they do not respond you should not follow up more than once.

You must ensure that you comply with the LinkedIn Policies, Terms and Conditions of use as well as Data Protection legislation. The following links refer:

-https://www.linkedin.com/legal/professional-community-policies (Conduct Policy), which says: Comply with the law: You must comply with all applicable laws, including, for example, privacy laws

- https://www.linkedin.com/help/linkedin/answer/61106/linkedin-messaging-overview?lang=en



7) Using Others' Photos for Research
 
1) Use of photos from social media sites. You need to determine if the social media site is a closed group (requires membership) e.g. LinkedIn or Facebook, or the information/photos published are publicly available e.g. Twitter. Either way, if using social media as a source then you will need to comply with the site provider’s terms and conditions of use. Where the social media site requires membership to view the images you will also need to check if there are group terms and conditions which are applicable - the smaller the group, the higher the expectation of privacy. Processing information available in the public domain depends on purposes, the processing being done and legal basis used, etc. The ICO has guidance here: https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-data-protection/guide-to-the-general-data-protection-regulation-gdpr/the-right-to-be-informed/what-common-issues-might-come-up-in-practice/#id3. Of course, processing for research can take place, but researchers must give due consideration to the requirements of the legislation and rights of participants, which is done through the University’s governance and ethics processes. There’s no problem with processing personal data as long as due regard is taken for the legislation and appropriate safeguards are put in place to protect participants' rights, the security of the personal data e.g. encrypted at all times and data minimisation is observed throughout the project e,g, collect only what is needed and pseudonymise personal data as early as possible.

2) The use of photos to generate information for the project e.g. as a discussion point not to be disseminated further and only available to the researcher and the participant/s, this is fine from a data protection perspective however, appropriate safeguards e.g. security, need to be observed and copyright requirements adhered to (see point 4). 

3) The use of photos in outputs would require permission from the owner of the image (for copyright purposes, please see below), and if individuals can be identified in the photo then you must be able to prove that you have provided them with your Privacy Notice or that doing so would involve disproportionate effort. If photos are taken at public events there is a reduced expectation of privacy for individuals attending those events, however you must check if event organisers have notices up around the event advising attendees that photography will/may take place and if they have stipulated that photography may take place in their privacy notice, so worth checking with the event organiser if this is the case. If you are organising the event then please ensure you have notices up and that you have advised attendees in your event sign-up form and privacy notice that photographs will be taken. It is advisable to include a 'check box' in the event sign-up form where the attendee agrees that they understand that photography will take place and that their photo may be taken and used. You MUST provide them with instructions on how to opt out of having their photo taken - it may be that you reserve seats which will not be included in any photography or ask them to specifically request this on the day, so that you can identify them in any images and discard those. Depending on your individual circumstances you could include photos in your marked dissertation / thesis and redact them from any published versions – this is the safest scenario, as it is possible for complaints to arise if an individual is recognised in circumstances which may have consequences for them e.g. attending an event when they should have been at work. If processing someone else’s personal data that isn’t a direct participant it’s always a good idea to think about how you’d feel if that was your personal data e.g. is it fair, would they expect it, etc. and then by doing the pre-PIA process you can ensure the processing complies with the legislation.

If you are using photos in your outputs which include personal data (recognisable individuals) then you MUST have their written agreement to do this and taking of photos and their uses must be detailed in both the Participant Information and the Privacy Notice. You can either rely on Article 6(1)(e) (please see your DPIA checklist form) or rely on Article 6(1)(a) consent. In order to evidence this you can take a photo of the individual holding the Privacy Notice with their signed agreement or consent form, and ensure that those records are kept securely with your research consent forms.

4) Copyright in photos – please see our Library Guide here for more information: Copyright for researchers - Copyright guidance - LibGuides at Edinburgh Napier University. RIE (Research & Innovation Office (napier.ac.uk)) has also provided the following advice in answer to the question

You will need permission to use photos or ascertain whether permission has already been given - sometimes this is attached to the image under a Creative Commons License. As this is 3rd party IP, there will normally be some sort of rights over the use of the image even if researchers are not reproducing the actual content, they need the photos to generate discussion and descriptors as they will then be creating their own dataset on the back of this for their research. The photo is the background IP and the output is the foreground IP. We may have no rights to disseminate the foreground unless we sought these right at the start. If no CC license is given, researchers will need to ascertain their own permissions. ​

 

8) Basic Pseudonymisation Guidance

Please see guidance document here: Basic_Pseudonymisation_Guidance


 
​​9) Providing Participants with a Secure Method of Sending Their Personal Data to the Researcher/s


Researchers have a responsibility to provide participants with a secure method of providing you with their personal data. One way of doing this is by using a survey tool. The University has several tools available including Novi Survey and MS Forms – further information about these is available here: https://my.napier.ac.uk/it-support/how-do-i/survey-software

When creating your survey you can divide it into sections/pages and use these pages in the following way:

Page 1 – Provide participants with information about your project (Participant Information Sheet)

Page 2 – Provide participants with a Privacy Notice (template available here: http://napierstaff.napier.ac.uk/services/governance-compliance/governance/DataProtection/Pages/statement.aspx)

Page 3 – Consent form

Page 4 – Collection of personal data e.g. name, contact details, and any other information required for you to confirm that they are suitable candidates in order for you to meet your research objectives (if this is necessary for your project)

Page 5 – Collection of research data via a questionnaire (if this is appropriate at this stage of the project)

Page 6 – Debrief information (if necessary)

You can then provide participants with a link to your survey in your project promotion communications and participants can provide the information directly to you securely and without having to provide it by email or via a third party (gate-keeper, etc.).​



It is likely that when you collect your research data you will also be collecting personal data, particularly if you are recording audiovisual interviews. Using University provided and approved systems to collect your research data ensures that the security checks have already been done by Information Services, although you still need to take resonable care that you are using the systems provided correctly. You need to consider security at all stages of processing personal data e.g. collection of participant information during recruitment, administration of the 'research instruments' (survey's interviews, etc. etc.), during any sharing of data with others or transfer of data between systems or parties, right through to destruction. The ICO (UK data protection regulator) requires personal data to be encrypted at all stages of processing.



10) Undergraduate and Taught Postgraduate Research / Dissertations
 

Please see: http://napierstaff.napier.ac.uk/services/governance-compliance/governance/DataProtection/Pages/StudentAdvice.aspx​​ 

This section is guidance for UG & TPG students who are not receiving a stipend from the University or engaged in a University sponsored or other third party funded research project.



Students processing personal data for the purposes of undertaking their studies do so for their own personal purposes e.g. as part of their degree course dissertation. The student makes their own decisions about what work they will do, how this will be done and presented in their final submission, and therefore works on behalf of themselves and not the University. Whilst supervisors can advise on good research practice and data protection issues, and make suggestions about how the research is conducted, the final decision lies with the student. The University only becomes the Data Controller once the work is submitted.



If you are emailing proposed participants or recruited participants you must NOT put a list of names in the "cc" field of the email - you must use "bcc", unless you have a specific reason that the participants need to see eachother's details.



When recruiting particpants you must think about what is fair and reasonable with regards to the use of their data e.g. would they expect to hear from you? It is good practice to let them know where you sourced their contact details from. Give them adequate information about what you are doing so that they are fully informed - this will reduce the risk of a complaint being made about your use of their information. It is always less risky to allow participants to 'self-select' rather than to target them from information gathered from sources other than directly from the person themselves. 'Self-select' means that you advertise your study/project and individuals make a decision to participate and provide their information voluntarily.



You must ensure all participant personal data is adequately secure e.g. encrupted at all stages of processing whether at rest or in transit. Do not use systems which are not reputable or do not provide adequate security.



It is recommended that you provide participants with information about what you need their personal data for (usually called a Privacy Notice), any third parties that you are sharing it with, your rationale for the length of time you will keep their personal data before destroying it and if you are tranferring it outside the UK (not recommended), along with your participant information outlining the purpose, aims and objectives of your research project. Further information is provided in the document linked below.



Remember to always treat others' personal data with the same respect that you would expect your own personal data to be treated with and not do anything with the personal data that they would not expect you to do. 


Practical guidance is available here: UG Dissertation & TPG Research Data Protection Advice​​



11) Transcription
​

Microsoft Teams and Word online can both record and transcribe for you, and Webex also has transcription facilities. MS Word online can both record and transcribe and you can also upload a recording for MS Word to transcribe. It is very easy to use - please see insrtuctions online here: https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/office/transcribe-your-recordings-7fc2efec-245e-45f0-b053-2a97531ecf57

It will:

1) Concurrently produce an audio file (mp3) and transcript.

2) Accept an uploaded mp3, perhaps created on Audacity or a hand-held recorder, and produce a transcript from it.

3) it will be saved to a personal space on the Napier network (on Sharepoint).

​This can be used imm​ediately by any researchers with a Napier identity.



Information Services are also investigating other options for Researchers using services like NVivo and Caption Ed.

​​

Currently the University has 2 contracted external services for transcriptions:

Trusty Transcriptionists, and 
1st Class Secretarial​
If you have made an audio visual recording, you must only provide the external transcription service with the audio file. To convert the MS Teams file to an mp3 audio file you will need to download a copy of the recording into an ENU network area/folder and convert it to mp3 format.


12) Briefing Sessions for Researchers
Every 6 weeks the Information Governance team run "Data Protection for Researchers" briefing sessions. These are arranged via RIE. Further information is available via the RIE sharepoint site here:

https://livenapierac.sharepoint.com/sites/Grp_RIO-ResearcherDevelopmentchannel/SitePages/Researcher-Development-Programme.aspx ​

And all events can be booked via Eventbrite - https://www.eventbrite.co.uk/organizations/events

Contact RIEevents@napier.ac.uk if you have any questions​






Page updated 14 Nov 2023

​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​


Rights and Access to Personal Information
 

Data Protection Legislation gives individuals certain rights over the use/processing of their personal data and a general right of access to their personal data. This is called making a Subject Access Request.

 

For further information about data subject rights please see our guide:

ENU GDPR Rights Guide

and

 Data Subject Rights Request Privacy Notice

 

Please note: We will not respond to any requests from third party SAR platforms (ICO guidance April 2019 refers)
​
Subject Access Request (SAR): For Personal Information
 

Please read these SAR Guidance Notes before you make your SAR. A request must be in writing, preferably on this

   Subject Access Request form​ and submitted with a copy/photo of the required identification documentation to:

 

Information Governance Manager

Governance & Compliance Services

6th Floor Sighthill Campus

Edinburgh

EH11 4BN

or emailed to dataprotection@napier.ac.uk

 

SAR Procedure​

 

Please note that we will not respond to requests from 3rd party online platforms/apps/websites as advised by the ICO Scotland Office.

 

Subject Access Request (SAR): For CCTV Images
 

Please read these Guidance Notes before you make your SAR. A request must be in writing, preferably on this

request form and submitted with the required documentation to:

 

Head, Campus Services

Room 6.B.24

Sighthill Campus

Edinburgh

EH11 4BN 

 

Request for the personal data of a deceased individual
 

We would only deal with requests of this type from the deceased individual's next of kin or their legal representative or Executor. If the request is from the deceased individual's next of kin they must provide proof of ID and proof that they are the next of kin. If the request is from the deceased individual's legal representative or Executor they must put their request in writing on headed paper with proof of their identity and a copy of the HMRC form confirming their status. Requests should be sent to:

 

Information Governance Manager

Governance & Compliance Services

6th Floor Sighthill Campus

Edinburgh

EH11 4BN

 

Request for rectification of personal data

 Under Article 16 Of the GDPR, EU Citizens have the right to have inaccurate personal data rectified by Data Controllers (in this case the University). This also includes the right to have incomplete personal data completed where relevant. Students and Staff Members have the ability to update their own personal data by using the portals provided by the University:

Students can use: https://evision.napier.ac.uk/si/sits.urd/run/siw_lgn 
Staff can use: https://hrconnect.napier.ac.uk/mthrprod_ess/ess/#/​ when logged in to the University network
​
If you are unable to make the updates yourself then please submit the form below to dataprotection@napier.ac.uk

Data Rectification Form​


 

Request for the erasure of personal data ("Right to be Forgotten")
 

Under Article 17 of the GDPR EU citizens have the right to request the erasure of their personal data. This is also known as the ‘right to be forgotten’. The right is not absolute and only applies in certain circumstances. The Information Commissioner’s (ICO) guidance refers: https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-data-protection/guide-to-the-general-data-protection-regulation-gdpr/individual-rights/right-to-erasure/

We ask you to complete the form below to enable us to find the relevant information in order to make a decision about erasure.

Erasure_Request_Form.docxErasure Request Form

 ​ 
Students/Graduates/Previous Students:
In relation to processing done by the University, this right does not apply as student personal data is processed under GDPR Article 6(1)(e): “processing is necessary for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority vested in the controller”, which is the Statutory Instrument 1993 Number 557 (S.76). GDPR Article 17(3)(b) refers.

If the course you studied is regulated there will also requirements under other legislation (e.g. health legislation for student nurses and midwives) for the University to keep certain records relating to students. We are also required to keep records to verify qualifications e.g. for crime and fraud purposes.

Therefore, whilst it is not possible to delete your personal data from the University’s records we can remove you from contact lists .g. the Alumni database, to stop youreceiving communications from the University.

For more information please see the University’s Privacy Notice/s (appropriate to yourself) – they detail the purposes, legal bases, etc. for processing.

Employees:​​​
The University processes your personal data under GDPR Article 6(1)(b): “processing is necessary for the performance of a contract”, etc. which refers to your employment contract. There is also no automatic right under the legislation to have your personal data deleted where this is the legal basis for processing, as the University is required to keep certain records as evidence of your employment.

Requests for deletion will be considered on a case by case basis, dependent on the circumstances, but ‘core’ information is required to be kept permanently, although there may be other information which can be deleted, if requested.

For more information please see the University’s Privacy Notice/s (appropriate to yourself) – they detail the purposes, legal bases, etc. for processing.

Communications:
Please note that where you ask us not to contact you we are required to keep a record of this to ensure that we adhere to your wishes and you are not re-added to our databases by another means and contacted again.                                                                                                             


 

 

 

                                                                                                                Page last updated 02 November 2020
Security of Personal Data
 

 

Further guidance on security of personal data is available in Section 7 of the Data Protection Code of Practice.

 Image of a safe
Security of Electronic Information Systems
For guidance on security of electronic information systems, please see the relevant details on the Information Services site.

 

Providing Coursework Marks to Students
It is much more secure to provide marks via Moodle than email. Instructions on how to do this can be found here. If you need more guidance please contact the Learning Technology Support Manager via: ISServiceDesk@napier.ac.uk

  
Manual & Physical Data Security Policy
In order to meet the requirements of Data Protection legislation, organisations are obliged to have in place a framework designed to ensure the security of all personal data.  The guidance note below sets out the University's policy on the security of manual and physical data.  Please note, this policy relates only to the retention and storage of non-electronically based personal data. All electronic data is covered separately by the University's Information Security Policy and its subsidiary policies.

 

Download the Manual and Physical Data Security Policy 


Security of Personal Information Checklist
This one-page checklist has been adapted from guidance issued by the UK Information Commissioner.

 

 Download the Security of Personal Information Checklist 

 

Password Protecting Documents
See below for guidance on how to password protect different document formats.

Password protect Word documents

Password protect Excel documents

Password protect PDF documents

 

Procedure for Breach of Data Security
 

It is important that action is taken as soon as possible following a data incident or breach to try to rectify the situation and mitigate any risks to data subjects. Tell your line manager, Governance Services or IS (as appropriate) - DON'T leave it...the sooner we know, the sooner we can do something about it!

 

Data Protection legislation governs the University's obligations with regard to personal data and these include a requirement to keep personal data secure. A breach of data security occurs where unauthorised or unintentional access to personal data is gained, whether this data is held in electronic or manual format. This procedure gives guidance on what to do in the event of such a breach occurring.

 

  Download the Procedure for a Breach of Data Security
 

If you send an email or email attachment in error the following are the steps you need to take to rectify it:

1) Re-open the email you've sent, click on 'Actions' on the toolbar at the top of the email, then select 'Recall this email'. Ensure the 'Delete unread copies of this email' (first option) and 'Tell me if recall succeeds or fails for each recipient' options are selected.

2) Copy the email from your sent items and paste it into a new email as an attachment and send this email to Unidesk@napier.ac.uk,  with a copy to dataprotection@napier.ac.uk,explaining what's happened and asking for the message to be deleted from the servers. The email should be titled "Data incident". It is important that a copy of the original email is provided as an attachment, not forwarded, as the attachment will contain metadata which will assist IS in finding it and removing it.

3) Complete the form at the end of the Procedure for Breach of Data Security and send this to dataprotection@napier.ac.uk

 

 Page last reviewed 26 August 2019


Social Networking & Online Forums
The UK Information Commissioner's Office (ICO) has published guidance on the application of Data Protection Legislation to the use of social networking for domestic and business purpImage of computer screenoses. There is a clear distinction between the two since use for domestic purposes i.e. personal data that is processed by an individual for the purposes of their personal, family or household affairs is exempt from the provisions of the legislation. 

Where however social networks and online forums are used for business purposes then that use is subject to the Data Protection Legislation in the normal way. When an organisation, or individual acting for non-domestic purposes, posts personal data on a social networking site, message board or blog, they will need to ensure that they have complied with Data Protection Legislation. The same applies if they download personal data from a social networking site and use it for non-domestic purposes.

The ICO's full guidance contains lots of practical examples which staff may find helpful in determining whether or not their online forum is being used for a domestic purpose and aims generally to help those using social networking in the course of their employment to understand their obligations and promote good practice.  Where staff are satisfied that they are using social networking for academic or business purposes then they can refer to this extract of the guidance for information.

 

Twitter - the legal perils and pitfalls
Twitter is increasingly used to engage with colleagues, students or customers in a quick and effective way but you should be aware of the legal line which may be crossed in using this social medium. This guide to the legal issues sets out what you need to know:   BBC Magazine article

 

 

Online Safety - what precautions can I take to keep my personal data secure online?
Organisations that collect and use individuals' information have responsibilities under Data Protection Legislation to protect it but how can you keep your personal data safe when conducting Image of a padlocked laptop PCyour personal affairs online?  The UK Information Commissioner comments that "more and more people are conducting their personal affairs online e.g. shopping, social networking, job hunting and the ability to carry out official functions, such as renewing car tax or contacting local councils and government departments online, are now an everyday part of life. Doing things online can offer convenience and widen opportunities and in general people value it.

However, you can take various precautions to protect yourself from identity fraud or the misuse of your information, or to ensure that your privacy is respected in the way you would want."

See the UK ICO's guide on weblink 'Online Safety' for more information.

 

Social Media Policy for Staff
Human Resources have developed a policy for all staff and third parties working for or on behalf of the University; including casual, agency and associate workers, who have access to the University’s electronic communication systems and equipment.  The policy is available here.

 

'Facing up to Facebook'
FE and HE institutions are increasingly using Facebook to engage with learners for educational purposes, e.g. a lecturer setting up a Facebook group with students. All staff must be aware that where institutional network systems are used there are a number of safeguards, procedures and support mechanisms which must be put in place to ensure safe, accessible and appropriate usage. This includes procedures to handle incidents of unacceptable Facebook usage, which could range from simple offensive behaviour to behaviour that is considered criminal in nature, such as racist abuse. JISC Legal have published a Guide for FE and HE institutions on the wide range of issues to be considered.

 

Use a Smartphone?
Here’s some  guidance from the UK Information Commissioner on keeping your device secure.

 

 

                                                                                                                   Page last reviewed 29 March 2019
Student AdviceImage of students in discussion

Further guidance on student advice is available in the Data Protection Code of Practice: Section 14.2 - Counselling Service for Students and Section 15 - Student Advice.


Counselling Services - Confidentiality & Data Protection
This leaflet provides guidance information on the confidentiality and data protection issues related to the Student Counselling Service.  For more information on the Counselling Service please see the Wellbeing and Support pages on MyNapier. 

 

  Download the Student Counselling Service Guidance on Confidentiality and Data Protection

 

 

Data Protection Factsheet for Students
This is an at-a-glance guide to some key Data Protection issues for every student, with 5 Things You Should Know and Top Tips from the UK Information Commissioner.

 

  Download the Data Protection Factsheet for Students

 

Personal Data Processed by Students
 

When students process personal data on University provided services for the purposes of maintaining their personal lives, e.g. communicating with family and friends, maintaining address lists, databases, pursuing their course of study with the University, including writing assignments, assessments, essays, reports, dissertations or theses, they do so for their personal purposes - the University is not the Data Controller for any data, personal or otherwise, as the student is not an employee or agent of the University and neither do they act on behalf of the University. Students are working on behalf of themselves, not the University.

 

Once the students' work is submitted to the University for assessment, the University becomes the Data Controller for that work, as provided.

 

Where students are working on a research project led by the University, where the University decides the remit of the project and therefore the purposes of processing, then the University is the Data Controller and all researchers on the project are required to comply with the requirements for research and researchers​.

 

                                                                                                                      Page last reviewed 29 March 2023
Data Protection Training
- the Data Protection Act 2018 and UK-GDPR (General Data Protection Regulation)
Training session
 

Do you deal with any personal data in the course of your work? If so, you need to know more about the General Data Protection Regulation and the Data Protection Act 2018 (collectively referred to as Data Protection legislation) and how it applies to your role at the University. The training is being provided to protect members of staff, the University and ultimately the individuals whose personal data we process. No-one wants to be involved in a personal data breach or information security incident!

Come to our next training session for a ‘whistle-stop’ tour of your rights and responsibilities as a member of staff.

This event provides an overview of the new Data Protection legislation and includes specific topics of interest to colleagues e.g. e-marketing, and new requirements for consent and privacy notices.

Facilitated by:
Diana Watt, Information Governance Manager
Duration: 1 hour, as part of the Information Governance Briefing sessions
Provider Details: Governance Services, dataprotection@napier.ac.uk, ext. 6257
 
Who should attend:
All new members of staff are expected to attend an initial Information Governance Briefing session as part of their induction. Online training must also be completed as part of induction and again annually as a refresher session - this is mandatory training for all University employees.

Main description:
As every member of staff processes personal data, all staff need to know about the University’s compliance obligations and ensure they are equipped to deal with those arising in their role/area.

This event will cover the following topics:
·        Expanded definition of personal data (data you didn’t consider to be ‘personal’ e.g. IP addresses, may now be included, which means you need to provide appropriate security and handling measures to it)
·        Requirements to demonstrate compliance and accountability
·        Privacy by design and security
·        Expanded data subject rights
·        New requirements for consent and expanded privacy notices
·        What to do when sharing data
·        Reviewing all contracts where data is shared and where data is processed outside the UK
·        How do we plan for implementation and what we can do now.
 
Current/topical issues will be included in these interactive sessions and there will be opportunities for Qs & As. Links to comprehensive advice and guidance and actions to follow up after a briefing session will also be provided. 

Session outcomes for participants are to:
• Be clear about their responsibilities under the new Regulation
• Recognise the practical data protection issues and risks in their area
• Know where to go for advice & guidance

Current Dates 
You can find details of upcoming sessions and book on via HR Connect http://staff.napier.ac.uk/learningevents/Pages/Default.aspx?SearchFilter=D 

 
Online Training
You can complete the online training module here or you can access it via:

All Programs > Apps Anywhere > Categories > Health and Safety > Essential Skillz

  
Departmental Briefing Sessions
Governance Services are also able to offer team briefing sessions where we can come along to a team meeting to brief colleagues and discuss issues in a team context. Please email us at dataprotection@napier.ac.uk if you would like to arrange one of these sessions for your team.

 

Other resources available:
The UK Information Commissioner's Office (ICO) has many resources available, including videos: https://www.youtube.com/user/icocomms

     
                                                                                                                   Page last reviewed 21 Feb 2022​


University’s Registration Number

The University is required to register with the UK Information Commissioner in order to process personal data.  The University’s Registration number is Z6797802. 

 

 


 
